April 5, 2019



Partners,

This letter conveys our support for a new Water Data Consortium in California and expresses our
agencies’ commitment to coordinate closely with this new Consortium.

Better use of data on water and ecosystems will help us meet growing demands placed on our water
resources by climate change, population growth and other factors. Data on climate change impacts, for
example, can help shape local agencies’ infrastructure investments to protect water reliability for their
customers. Other types of data can help state agencies better understand where Californians are most
vulnerable to drought, flood, and water quality impacts, which allows state government and local
communities to strengthen resilience before the next crisis strikes. Data is also critical to implement key
state goals such as the implementation of the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act (SGMA). For
SGMA, groundwater data allows local agencies to set baselines and benchmarks for achieving
groundwater sustainability and is necessary to identify opportunities to increase groundwater recharge
and enable water trading where local water users find it useful.

Assembly Bill 1755 (AB 1755), the Open and Transparent Water Data Act passed in 2016, acknowledges
the tremendous potential of California’s water data. It requires the California Department of Water
Resources (DWR), in consultation with the State Water Resources Control Board (Water Board), the
California Department of Fish and Wildlife (DFW), and the California Water Quality Monitoring Council
(Council), to make available important water and ecosystem data for widespread use. In response, DWR
convened a broad Partner Agency Team comprised of the entities listed above and other state agencies
that have data, expertise, and interest in implementing AB 1755. The Partner Agency Team then
developed an AB 1755 Strategic Plan to guide AB 1755 implementation.

Implementing the AB 1755 Strategic Plan promises to improve water decision-making by making water
and ecosystem data more accessible, useful, and ultimately well-utilized. To achieve this potential, the
strategic plan acknowledges that broad public engagement is essential. Accordingly, the Partner Agency
Team has convened collaborative venues and workshops to engage stakeholders and experts. A
technical group is helping develop data standards and protocols, a UC Berkeley team spearheaded a set
of sample use cases to demonstrate the connection between decisions and data, and public “water data
challenges” have been developed that provide opportunity for civic engagement.

Development of a shared governance model to coordinate water data will build upon this public
engagement and collaboration and will ensure that AB 1755 is implemented in a manner that enables
data to be accessible, useful and well-utilized. For this governance model, AB 1755 authorizes DWR to
“…partner with an existing nonprofit organization, with a new nonprofit organization that the
department creates…, or with another state agency to create, operate, or maintain, or any combination
thereof, the platform.” The Partner Agency Team has opted to expand investment in two existing
platforms, the data.ca.gov and data.cnra.ca.gov platforms, rather than create totally new data
platforms.

These two state government data platforms will be “federated,” meaning that they will be made
interoperable. Besides avoiding redundancy, creating a federation of data platforms enables connection
with other federal and local data platforms that meet state standards and protocols. This approach
provides the potential to exponentially expand data access and utilizations. The Strategic Plan
recognizes that responsibility and authority over publishing state data and operating state-run portals
needs to remain with state agencies but that a “shared governance space will provide the
organizational infrastructure to support broad engagement, investment, adoption, and persistence of
open data infrastructure” (Governing California’s Open Water Data Infrastructure, p.2).

Inclusive engagement by a broad range of stakeholders will be enabled by the formation of a Water
Data Consortium, which has been developed by the Water Foundation and other stakeholders and
refined by the Water Data Advisory Council, a body convened by the Governor’s Office of Planning and
Research. The Consortium has been designed to enable broad stakeholder participation; a continuous
discourse centered around the needs of water data users; a shared venue for dialog and collaborative
projects; and a dialogue to inform the state’s own use of water data. The Consortium steering
committee will include state agency representatives, water managers, NGOs, and others with expertise
on water data.

The California Natural Resources Agency, the California Environmental Protection Agency, and the
members of the Partner Agency Team support the creation of a Water Data Consortium and commit to
close coordination between state agencies and the activities of the Consortium. Our vision for the
relationship between the state agencies and the Consortium is outlined in the attached table. We
welcome the Consortium’s initial focus on streamlining data submissions to state agencies.

We greatly appreciate the commitment and investment being made by a broad range of groups and
leaders working to create the Consortium. This shared effort provides an early example of the
collaborative spirit we expect the Consortium to nurture.
Sincerely,

 ncere




Wade Crowfoot                                  Jared Blumenfeld
Secretary for Natural Resources                Secretary for Environmental Protection
Partner Agency Team
Department of Water Resources
Karla Nemeth, Director
Kamyar Guivetchi, Team Member
Christina McCready, Team Member

Department of Fish and Wildlife
Chuck Bonham, Director
Tom Lupo, Team Member

State Water Resources Control Board
Joaquin Esquivel, Chair
Greg Gearhart, Team Member
Rafael Maestu, Team Member

Water Quality Monitoring Council
Nicholas Martorano, Executive Director, Team Member

California Natural Resources Agency
Wade Crowfoot, Secretary
Tim Garza, Team Member
David Harris, Team Member

Delta Stewardship Council
Susan Tatayon, Chair
George Isaac, Team Member

California Government Operation Agency
Marybel Batjer, Secretary
Stuart Drown, Team Member
Angelica Quirarte, Team Member

Governor’s Office of Planning and Research
Kate Gordon, Director
Debbie Franco, Team Member



Note: this page was re-formatted for improved readability with a screen reader.
                                     Open Water Data Infrastructure Activities

                                Consortium                                               Partner Agency Team
        Gather feedback from stakeholders and make                  Collect, federate, and make available water and
        recommendations to improve data collection and              ecosystem data.
        publication by state agencies.
        Gather feedback from stakeholders and make                  Maintain and expand federation of existing and
        recommendations to improve federation of existing and       future data portals.
        new data portals.
        Develop shared data standards and protocols for voluntary   Adopt and implement state standards and protocols.
        adoption by organizations external to the state.

        Solicit input on and develop recommendations to improve     Consider and possibly implement recommendations for
        the process of data submission to the state.                streamlining local agency data submission to the state.
        Develop pathway to leverage non-state funding for AB 1755   Ensure adequate state funding for state responsibilities
        related activities.                                         related to AB 1755.

Tasks   Promote innovation and lay the groundwork for pursuit of    Consider new opportunities developed by the
        new opportunities.                                          Consortium.
        Build trust with data producers, providers, users, and      Build trust with data producers, providers, users, and
        consumers.                                                  consumers.
        Create a venue for stakeholders that includes state         Evaluate progress on the implementation of the open
        agencies to identify shared benchmarks and performance      water data infrastructure towards achieving identified
        measures to ensure that water and ecological data are       shared benchmarks and performance measures.
        sufficient, accessible, useful, and used.
        Develop, collect, and recommend use cases to increase       Prioritize data transformation to serve use
        effective decision making.                                  cases, as appropriate and feasible.
        Recommend strategic direction for data standards,           Collaborate with the Consortium on updates to the AB
        federation, and operation and maintenance of the data       1755 Strategic Plan, as needed to support water
        platform.                                                   management
