            Progress Report
for Implementation of Assembly Bill 1755,
the Open and Transparent Water Data Act


               April 2018
Progress Report: April 2018



Contents

   Progress Report on Implementation of Assembly Bill 1755, the Open and Transparent Water
   Data Act .................................................................................................................................................... 1
   Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 1
   Communication and Engagement (February – April 2018) ...................................................................... 2
   Implementing the Open and Transparent Water Data Act ........................................................................ 2
      Strategic Plan ........................................................................................................................................ 3
      Protocols ............................................................................................................................................... 3
      Use Cases .............................................................................................................................................. 4
      Exploration of Governance and Funding Options ................................................................................ 5
      The California Safe Drinking Water Data Challenge 2018 .................................................................. 6
      Interoperability Testbeds....................................................................................................................... 6
      Interagency Implementation Planning .................................................................................................. 7
      Federated Interoperable Portals ............................................................................................................ 8
      User Focus and Continuous Improvement ............................................................................................ 8
      Effects of AB 1755 on Local Agencies............................................................................................... 11
   What’s Next? .......................................................................................................................................... 12
      Next Steps ........................................................................................................................................... 12
      How can you get involved?................................................................................................................. 13
   Useful Links ............................................................................................................................................ 15
   Acknowledgements ................................................................................................................................. 16



Tables
Table 1 Status of AB 1755 Platform Protocols ......................................................................................... 4

Table 2 Phase I Projects, July 2017–September 2019 .............................................................................. 9

Table 3 Phase II Projects, September 2019–September 2020 ............................................................... 10

Table 4 Phase III Projects, September 2020–Future ............................................................................. 11

Table 5 Ongoing Projects ......................................................................................................................... 11




Figure
Figure 1 Implementing the Open and Transparent Water Data Act ..................................................... 3



Note: Titles and terms in blue within this report correspond to links provided in the final section, “Useful
Web Links.”




                                                                               ii
                                                        AB 1755: Open and Transparent Water Data Act



Acronyms and Abbreviations


AB 1755           Assembly Bill 1755, the Open and Transparent Water Data Act

CCST              California Council on Science and Technology

CDFW              California Department of Fish and Wildlife

CNRA              California Natural Resources Agency

CWQMC             California Water Quality Monitoring Council

DSC               Delta Stewardship Council

DWR               California Department of Water Resources

GovOps            Government Operations Agency

OPR               Governor’s Office of Planning and Research

Progress Report   Progress Report — Implementing the Open and Transparent Water Data Act with
                  Initial Draft Strategic Plan and Preliminary Protocols

SWRCB             State Water Resources Control Board




                                              iii
                                                                 AB 1755: Open and Transparent Water Data Act




Progress Report on Implementation of
Assembly Bill 1755, the Open and
Transparent Water Data Act
Introduction
This is the second progress report on the implementation of Assembly Bill 1755, the Open and
Transparent Water Data Act (AB 1755), which directs the California Department of Water Resources
(DWR), the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB), the California Department of Fish and
Wildlife (CDFW), and the California Water Quality Monitoring Council (CWQMC) to improve the
accessibility and usability of water and ecological data. Based on extensive stakeholder engagement, the
intended outcome for AB 1755 is a federated network of data portals with data that are sufficient,
accessible, useful, and used to support decision making. AB 1755 implementation is an evolving process
that will adapt over time in response to changing software capabilities and the needs of data users and
providers.

The role of data in water management is not new. Water managers of all levels have incorporated
available data into their decision-making processes, and numerous entities have stepped forward to
collect, manage, and share data for specific purposes, with varying degrees of support. This legacy forms
a strong foundation for AB 1755; without these accomplishments, we could not hope to realize the vision
of useful data for sound, sustainable water management. We can build on past successes, while striving
for—and accelerating—advances in data management, data integration, and decision-making. AB 1755
aspires to more effectively put data to work across political, disciplinary, and agency boundaries.

This April 2018 progress report includes an updated strategic plan, updates on protocols, supplemental
information about use cases and their development, discussion of long-term governance and funding
options, news about upcoming data challenges and testbed activities, a high-level look at interagency
implementation planning, and opportunities for engagement.

This progress report builds upon the January 2018 document, “Progress Report — Implementing the
Open and Transparent Water Data Act with Initial Draft Strategic Plan and Preliminary Protocols”. Taken
together, the Progress Report (January 2018) and this progress report describe the background,
accomplishments, and next steps in implementation of AB 1755. They reflect a user-centered approach
that is intended to build the relationships and investments necessary across State, federal, and Tribal
agencies, and among stakeholders to assure that AB 1755 and the larger data vision will be sustainable
over time.

State agency staff and other stakeholders involved in this implementation embrace the opportunity AB
1755 affords us to support greater data sharing and to enable California to address its numerous water
management challenges through data-driven decision making. Contributions of energy and expertise by
the State agencies identified in legislation and beyond (i.e., State, federal, and local agencies, researchers,
and philanthropy) have been awe-inspiring. Indeed, AB 1755 has catalyzed an initiative to strengthen
State agency alignment, engage data providers and data users, promote partnerships, pool expertise and


                                                       1
Progress Report: April 2018



resources, and build a culture of open and transparent data exchange – all prerequisites for putting data to
work to transform the way water is managed in California.

Communication and Engagement (February – April 2018)
Communication and coordination are critical to the successful implementation of AB 1755, both
internally and externally. Since the release of the Progress Report (January 2018), the Partner Agencies
have continued their aggressive schedule of coordination to ensure continuous engagement with the water
management community as summarized below.
      • 13 AB 1755 implementation team meetings: February 2018–April 2018
      • 9 meetings on governance and funding exploration: February 2018–March 2018
      • 6 partner agency team meetings: February 2018–April 2018
      • 5 presentations of the early implementation of AB 1755
           o California Water Quality Monitoring Council Meeting: February 2018
           o DWR’s Environmental Coordination Committee: February 2018
           o Public webinar on AB 1755 implementation: March 2018
           o Public engagement at the Water Board Data Fair: March 2018
           o Presentation at California Water and Environmental Modeling Forum: April 2018
      • 2 convenings of State Water Agency Principals: March 2018 and April 2018
      • 2 meetings with California Council on Science and Technology: February 2018 and April 2018
      • 11 meetings on Safe Drinking Water Data Challenge: March 2018 and April 2018

Implementing the Open and Transparent Water Data Act
The Partner Agency Team responsible for implementing AB 1755 is comprised of many agencies
including those named in legislation, DWR, SWRCB, CDFW, and CWQMC, as well as the Governor’s
Office of Planning and Research (OPR), the California Natural Resources Agency (CNRA), the
Government Operations Agency (GovOps), and the Delta Stewardship Council (DSC). The Partner
Agency Team meets regularly to plan, discuss progress, and offer high-level guidance in the multi-agency
effort to fulfill requirements of AB 1755. Figure 1 provides a conceptual characterization of the State’s
approach to implementation. Progress on the efforts shown in Figure 1 will be outlined in the sections to
follow.




                                                     2
                                                                AB 1755: Open and Transparent Water Data Act



Figure 1 Implementing the Open and Transparent Water Data Act




Strategic Plan
The Progress Report (January 2018) included an initial draft Strategic Plan. The partner agencies received
many insightful comments that aided us in adapting the Strategic Plan to make it more representative of
opinions expressed by the water and environmental community. New actions have been added, and many
actions have been revised. Additionally, work is already underway to transition from a strategic planning
posture to interagency implementation planning, in which strategic actions are being translated into
specific projects intended to accomplish the four goals of the strategic plan — data are sufficient,
accessible, useful, and used. The Strategic Plan (April 2018) has been posted on the AB 1755 website.

Protocols
The Progress Report (January 2018) included three initial protocols needed to enable early publishing of
data on open data platforms: (1) identify a data steward, (2) publish and document on an open data
platform, and (3) access data. Over time, these initial protocols will evolve, and additional protocols will
be developed. Two protocol topics — data security and federation — have already been identified by
commenters on the Progress Report (January 2018). These protocol topics and those identified in the
Open Water Information Architecture and the Strategic Plan (April 2018) will be developed in
coordination with technical and stakeholder groups throughout the course of AB 1755 implementation.
The status of existing and prospective AB 1755 Platform protocols is summarized in Table 1.




                                                      3
Progress Report: April 2018



Table 1 Status of AB 1755 Platform Protocols
 Protocols developed to date                     Status
 Identify a Data Steward                         Available in Progress Report (January 2018)
 Publish and Document on an Open-Data Platform
 Access data
 Protocol topics to be developed                 Status
 Data Security                                   Informed by comments on Progress Report (January 2018)
 Federation
 Use Case Development                            Captured as strategic action in Strategic Plan (April 2018)
 Interoperability                                Captured as a project in Progress Report (April 2018), Interagency
                                                 Implementation Planning section
 Data Acquisition                                Outlined in the Open Water Information Architecture (January 2018)
 Quality Control
 Publication
 Data Traceability
 System Portability
 External Interfaces



Details on developed protocols are available in the Protocols for Assembly Bill 1755, the Open and
Transparent Water Data Act. Additionally, an abbreviated checklist that summarizes the steps to publish
data to an open data platform is now available as an appendix to the Protocols. Once developed, protocols
will be tested using a testbed or similar mechanism to ensure the requirements proposed achieve the
intended outcomes. A proposed process for developing, vetting, and approving new protocols was
outlined in the Progress Report (January 2018), which applies adaptive management to respond to
evolving user needs and technological improvement. The AB 1755 protocols will be a “living document,”
and up-to-date protocols will be available through the open data platforms and the AB 1755 website.

The partner agencies invite and encourage anyone interested in developing, contributing to, or providing
feedback on existing or new protocols to contact us and get involved in the process. Additional
information about phasing of new protocol development is available in the Strategic Plan (April 2018)
and the Interagency Implementation Planning section below.

Use Cases
As discussed in the Progress Report (January 2018), DWR, California Council on Science and
Technology (CCST), and UC Water co-hosted a series of workshops founded on the conviction that, to
properly enable data-driven decisions, consideration should be given to “decision-driven data.” In these
workshops and subsequent efforts, researchers and water management professionals interactively
developed 20 draft use cases — short examinations of how decision processes employ data — to inform a
decision-driven water-data system. A report on this effort and a compendium of the 20 draft use cases was
published by the UC Berkeley School of law, Center for Law, Energy & the Environment.

The initial 20 draft use cases are not intended to span the entire decision space of water and
environmental management, nor are they designed to be a comprehensive library of possible water
management decisions. Rather, they serve as a proof-of-concept to demonstrate that developing use cases



                                                          4
                                                                AB 1755: Open and Transparent Water Data Act



is an effective means of focusing decision-making and prioritizing data collection and publication. The 20
draft use cases are a starting point for the kinds of decisions to which the evolving federated,
interoperable open data portals of AB 1755 must respond.

The development of use cases helps clarify the questions that water resource decision-makers must
answer and identifies the data necessary to answer those questions. Cooperative development of use cases
allows water resource managers to examine a decision from multiple perspectives; it yields transparent
documentation that water resource managers can use to communicate their decision-making process with
stakeholders, to solicit improvements, and to foster trust in decisions; and it can help decision-makers
articulate expectations of a data system in such a way that technical experts can analyze and address those
expectations.

Well-documented use cases can also help inform prioritization of datasets for publication on an open data
system, although the existence of a use case will certainly not be the only factor. Other tools may exist for
identifying and connecting water management decisions with the data needed to support those decisions,
and some datasets will be deemed critical, even absent a formal use case.

Though the initial effort to develop the 20 use cases is complete, the Partner Agencies invite anyone
involved in water management decision-making to contribute additional use cases, share available
datasets for publication, or federate additional existing data portals.

The use case approach has broad appeal, because it serves as a "meeting place" for water management
professionals and information technology experts. It is the understanding of the Partner Agencies and our
research partners that the State of Texas is embarking on the same path to identify who needs what data,
in what form, for what decisions.

Exploration of Governance and Funding Options
Implementation of AB 1755 must include thoughtful choices about long-term governance and funding for
the open data platform. While the Partner Agencies deliberate over the various expectations of a statewide
integrated platform and the corresponding development approach, one thing is certain: In the absence of a
resilient governance structure and stable funding model, the open data platform is not sustainable.

In creating, operating, and maintaining the platform, numerous actions and decisions will have to be
coordinated — from system architecture to protocols adoption to platform development and use. A
governance structure is the body of established rules and expectations about how these things will be
decided and coordinated.

When it comes to funding the operation and maintenance of the open data system, the Open and
Transparent Water Data Act established the Water Data Administration Fund, which can receive
voluntary contributions, but the legislation did not include a funding appropriation. This highlights one of
the biggest challenges the AB 1755 open data platform will face, the need for dedicated resources to keep
it running.

During the first quarter of 2018, an independent exploration was conducted, in consultation with the
partner agency team, to consider and evaluate governance and funding options for the platform described



                                                      5
Progress Report: April 2018



in AB 1755. The exploration was initiated by the Water Foundation and conducted by Redstone Strategy
Group, with funding from the S.D. Bechtel, Jr. Foundation, and it included the voluntary participation of
a range of distinguished professionals throughout California. This group met to discuss three key
questions:
      1. What are the governance needs associated with implementation of AB 1755?
      2. What organizational structure(s) would best meet these governance needs?
      3. How can governance promote a sustainable funding model for AB 1755?

Because work on open data in California is a microcosm of a national-level conversation, the exploration
also included interviews with more than 30 experts and stakeholders throughout the nation.

Redstone conducted the investigation independent of State oversight, acting with autonomy in the
production of a report of findings and recommendations, and Partner Agency representatives had regular
opportunities to offer input and feedback.

The Governor’s Office of Planning and Research is leading an effort, with active participation of
executive management at CNRA, CalEPA, DWR, SWRCB, DFW, and GovOps, to consider and evaluate
governance and funding options, informed by the independent report described above. This group of
partner agency executives is charged with developing specific, actionable recommendations for long-term
platform governance and funding for consideration and decision by the Administration in 2018.

The California Safe Drinking Water Data Challenge 2018
Annually, as many as 1 million Californians lack access to clean, safe drinking water, and the Governor's
Office of Planning and Research and the West Big Data Innovation Hub are launching a data challenge to
demonstrate the power of open data to solve one of California’s most pressing issues. They have initiated
this data challenge to engage innovators, test data skills, and help develop tools to improve access to safe
drinking water. In partnership with the Water Foundation, Imagine H2O, and the Bay Area Council, and
with support from the State agency stewards of critical water data and a growing community of partners,
this data challenge wants participants to use open data with an emphasis on user-centered design, to
explore data’s potential to better understand and define the specific challenges faced by communities
lacking access to safe drinking water, help them anticipate vulnerabilities, and identify and deploy
community-based solutions. The safe drinking water data challenge will also invite users to provide
feedback on their experience using open data to respond to the challenge. This feedback will inform our
AB 1755 efforts.

Stay tuned as more details on this event will be available soon, and follow the progress at
#CAWaterDataChallenge on social media.

Interoperability Testbeds
A key attribute of the federated open data system is that it will bring together data from many places to
form a consistent whole, allowing for the free exchange of information about California’s water and
ecological resources. The open data system should accommodate many types of analysis and visualization
to support the transition from data to usable information. To facilitate this federation, the Partner
Agencies will establish interoperability testbeds.




                                                     6
                                                                AB 1755: Open and Transparent Water Data Act



It is imperative that our efforts focus on key decisions needed for California water resources management
and the data needed for those decisions.

Interoperability is vital to efficient and effective water management decision-making. Much of the data
needed for water management decisions in California comes from local government, and the State will
have to integrate local data into a regional view to meet broad, statewide requirements. In addition to
inherent differences from one data provider to another, we must recognize that computer systems and
commercial software used by water data providers differ substantially, as well.

To assure interoperability of data coming from a diverse set of sources, it will be necessary to set
common protocols and data standards to facilitate the useful exchange of information. This is analogous
to routine protocols for transferring data between different computers; however, achieving the
interoperability of data from different sources and systems will be a much more difficult task.

Planning is underway to develop and deploy, by fall 2018, interoperability testbeds that allow innovative
users to test the ability of proposed protocols and data standards to address specific use cases. Participants
will work together to select and test data formats, quality assurance/quality control levels, update
frequencies, and exchange protocol choices. It is also necessary to assure that relevant data are properly
inventoried and available for the selected use cases. Conducting these testbeds will help ensure that
proposed protocols and standards utilized for the platform are beneficial in achieving the goals of the
Strategic Plan – that data are accessible, sufficient, useful, and used. Each testbed will conclude with
documentation of lessons learned and analyses of beneficial or non-beneficial protocols and standards,
along with specific recommendations for future actions. Testbeds will be a tool for ongoing platform
development.

Interagency Implementation Planning
The next step in interagency implementation planning is to prioritize identified projects based on
legislative mandates and available funds. The Partner Agencies have begun to identify and describe
projects needed to achieve the goals, objectives, and actions outlined in the updated Strategic Plan (April
2018). Each Partner Agency brings to bear unique data management skillsets, perspectives, and interests
toward implementing AB 1755. For example, the CWQMC and its workgroups have expertise in
coordinating the monitoring, collection, and reporting of data across state agencies and then turning that
data into useful information using data visualizations and tools to answer specific regulatory management
questions. In turn, the portals managed by the CWQMC workgroups may consume data from the AB
1755 federated open data system. Through robust communication and coordination, the Partner Agencies
seek to leverage one another’s unique expertise and mandates to enhance AB 1755 project outcomes,
identify areas of overlap, eliminate redundancy, and discover new efficiencies.

Tables 2-5 include the preliminary mapping of strategic goals and objectives to specific projects that are
critical to achieve the vision of AB 1755. Each table includes projects identified for successive phases
(time periods) of platform implementation. Due to the iterative and adaptive nature of AB 1755
implementation, plans will be continuously reviewed and revised as needed to ensure effective and
efficient progress. Also, the future, long-term governance structure will have the authority to refine
priorities. Finally, completion of the listed projects by the partner agencies is critically dependent on
funding; many projects require funding beyond what is currently available.



                                                      7
Progress Report: April 2018



Federated Interoperable Portals
In March 2018, the CNRA released its new Open Data Portal, which gives agencies, stakeholders, and
interested parties better access to Natural Resource Agency data. The portal helps State, federal, Tribal,
and local entities make resources-related decisions by giving them open access to data that may have been
inaccessible. The portal already features data, showcases, and information visualizations related to water,
wildlife, conservation, energy, protected lands, and oceans. At the time of this report, State agencies have
made available through the portal over 1,300 datasets and 20 data visualizations. Additional functionality
as well as new and updated data will be added to the site on a continuous basis.

Another recent and significant achievement is that the CNRA Open Data Portal successfully federated
data from three constituent departments. Additionally, the CNRA Open Data Portal and statewide open
data portal, data.ca.gov, hosted by GovOps and the California Department of Technology, are working to
federate their combined library of datasets. Once accomplished, users of either portal will be able to
access datasets across many State agencies and departments. This is significant for two reasons. First, it
will demonstrate the feasibility of a network of federated interoperable portals in bringing together data
from disparate sources. Second, successful federation will unify datasets from multiple State agencies (for
example, CDFW and DWR make data available on the CNRA Open Data Portal, and the SWRCB makes
data available on data.ca.gov).

The AB 1755 open data platform is being developed by federating the existing CNRA, GovOps, and
other portals. As such, the partner agencies will not release a request for proposals for the development of
a statewide integrated water data platform.

User Focus and Continuous Improvement
Success will be measured by the system’s ability to evolve and improve over time in response to users’
needs. Performance metrics and user feedback — both positive and suggestions for improvement — will
be monitored and evaluated and will guide evolution of the system in the long term. Decision-making
about the system itself will be addressed by a governance structure to be determined.




                                                     8
                                                             AB 1755: Open and Transparent Water Data Act



Table 2 Phase I Projects, July 2017–September 2019
 Goals         Objectives      Project                       Project Description
 Completed
 Goal 1        Objective 1.1   Initial Use Cases             Develop an initial set of use cases to define
                                                             and articulate stakeholders’ data and
                                                             information needs in terms that are
                                                             translatable into platform requirements. For
                                                             more information, see Data for Water
                                                             Decision Making Report.
 Goal 2        Objective 2.1   Initial Protocols             Develop and publish minimum protocols for
                                                             data publication. This includes required
                                                             and optional metadata requirements, data
                                                             dictionary if applicable, and optional free
                                                             text description of the data collection, data
                                                             management, and data qualification
                                                             methods.
 Started
 Goal 2        Objective 2.1   Sustainable Governance and    A project to establish the governance and
 Goal 4        Objective 4.3   Funding                       sustained funding business model
                                                             recommended by the effort led by Water
                                                             Foundation, OPR, Redstone, and others.
                                                             Develop governance structure and process
                                                             to guide evolution of protocols.
 Goal 2        Objective 2.2   Publish State-Held Datasets   Publish datasets including datasets
                                                             identified in AB 1755.
 Goal 2        Objective 2.2   Platform Federation           Develop and publish federation protocol.
                                                             Federate with other open data platforms.
 Goal 4        Objective 4.4   Safe Drinking Water Data      Conduct the Safe Drinking Water Data
                               Challenge                     Challenge. Encourage citizens and
                                                             government programs to develop decision-
                                                             support tools and custom web application
                                                             using datasets from the open data
                                                             platform.
 Goal 4        Objective 4.2   Communication and             Develop and implement a communications
                               Engagement Strategy           and engagement strategy for the water
                                                             community.
 Planned
 Goal 1        Objective 1.1   Data Inventory                Identify and publish a list of water
               Objective 1.2                                 resources-related datasets from use cases.
                                                             Inventory and publish list of water
                                                             resources-related datasets. Include
                                                             government agency that collected the data,
                                                             along with the reason the information was
                                                             collected.
 Goal 4        Objective 4.1   Testbeds                      Select a few use cases, protocols, and
                                                             data standards, and use data published on
                                                             the open data platform to address the
                                                             issues raised. Publish lessons learned from
                                                             pilot projects to improve open data platform
                                                             and protocols.




                                                     9
Progress Report: April 2018



Table 3 Phase II Projects, September 2019–September 2020
 Goals            Objectives      Project                        Project Description
 Goal 1           Objective 1.1   Use Case Protocol              Develop protocol for writing use cases
                                                                 based on lessons learned from use case
                                                                 pilot projects.
 Goal 1           Objective 1.2   Streamline Data Reporting      Evaluate data currently reported to the
                                                                 State by local agencies to streamline
                                                                 reporting and reduce burden on local
                                                                 agencies. Produce a report with findings
                                                                 and recommendations.
 Goal 1           Objective 1.2   Identify Data Gaps             Identify data needed, but not collected,
                                                                 from existing use cases. Publish identified
                                                                 data gaps. Support coordination between
                                                                 data providers and users to address data
                                                                 gaps.
 Goal 3           Objective 3.2   Visualization, Querying, and   Develop simple visualization tools for the
                                  Download Tools                 open data platform. Develop tools for
                                                                 filtering and querying datasets, and support
                                                                 downloading subsets of data on open data
                                                                 platform.
 Goal 3           Objective 3.2   Custom Web Applications        Collaborate with third parties to develop
                                  and Decision Support Tools     custom web applications and decision
                                                                 support tools. Provide a location to feature
                                                                 third-party tools on a rotational basis.
 Goal 3           Objective 3.2   Support Spatial Discovery      Develop map-based web application
                                                                 enabling users to spatially discover
                                                                 datasets across federated AB 1755 open
                                                                 data platforms.
 Goal 4           Objective 4.2   Data Stewardship Training      Develop training resources for Partner
                                                                 Agencies wishing to elevate their data to
                                                                 the open data platform.
 Goal 2           Objective 2.2   Publish Federal Datasets       Federate with platforms publishing federal
                                                                 datasets identified in legislation on open
                                                                 data platform.
 Goal 3           Objective 3.1   Interoperability Protocol      Develop protocol to align vocabulary,
                                                                 metadata requirements, geo-referencing
                                                                 practices, keyword use, and organization of
                                                                 datasets to improve discoverability,
                                                                 interoperability and to facilitate data
                                                                 integration.




                                                        10
                                                                 AB 1755: Open and Transparent Water Data Act



Table 4 Phase III Projects, September 2020–Future
 Goals           Objectives      Project                         Project Description
 Goal 4          Objective 4.2   Data Science Training           Develop training resources for data
                                                                 consumers to improve data literacy.
 Goal 3          Objective 3.3   Data Archive                    Archive all versions of datasets on the
                                                                 open data platform.
 Goal 3          Objective 3.1   Achieve Interoperability        Utilize interoperability protocol to
                                                                 standardize datasets to improve
                                                                 discoverability and usability of datasets on
                                                                 the federated open data portals.
 Goal 4          Objective 4.4   Data Citations                  Encourage government publications to
                                                                 source and cite data published in the open
                                                                 data platform.
 Goal 3          Objective 3.2   Information and Accessibility   Foster and support development of an
                                                                 analytical sandbox for the water
                                                                 community.




Table 5 Ongoing Projects
 Goals           Objectives      Project                         Project Description
 Goal 2          Objective 2.2   Data Publication                Expand use of data.ca.gov,
                                                                 data.cnra.ca.gov, and other existing open
                                                                 data platforms for publishing data
 Goal 1          Objective 1.1   Use Case Solicitation           As needed, collect and publish use cases
                                                                 and data needs from data consumers and
                                                                 water resource managers.
 Goal 1          Objective 1.1   Data Inventory                  Identify, publish, and maintain a list of
                 Objective 1.2                                   water resources-related datasets from use
                                                                 cases. Inventory, publish, and maintain a
                                                                 list of water resources-related datasets.
                                                                 Include government agency that collected
                                                                 the data, along with the reason the
                                                                 information was collected.
 Goal 4          Objective 4.4   Civic Engagement                Encourage citizens and government
                                                                 programs to develop decision-support tools
                                                                 and custom web application using datasets
                                                                 from the open data platform.
 Goal 2          Objective 2.2   User Feedback                   Collect information from consumers on
 Goal 4          Objective 4.3                                   improvements that could be made to the
                                                                 data, or data format, and implement
                                                                 recommendations as feasible. Continually
                                                                 enhance the open data platform based on
                                                                 input from data consumers, data providers,
                                                                 and AB 1755 governance.




Effects of AB 1755 on Local Agencies
An emergent theme of public comment on the Progress Report (January 2018) was an expressed concern
that AB 1755 will introduce new burdens on local water data collectors — namely new, unfunded data
reporting mandates and increased legal, safety, and security concerns. The Partner Agencies acknowledge



                                                      11
Progress Report: April 2018



these concerns and understand their origin. History offers many examples of well-intentioned, yet under-
resourced or unfunded, mandates. The enthusiasm already exhibited for implementing AB 1755, and the
governance and funding options described above, can and may guarantee a more successful outcome this
time.

By ensuring that data are sufficient, accessible, useful, and used, the full potential of data can be
unleashed to make sound, sustainable water management decisions and, through use cases, support more
fact-based discussion of water management decisions and the data needed to make them. Transparency in
data may yield new opportunities to course-correct, such as the identification of redundancy in data
reporting, which would enable greater efficiency and consistency statewide.

It is noteworthy that the Open and Transparent Water Data Act imposes no new obligations on local data
providers. Data reporting mandates in effect prior to the passage of AB 1755 persist, and only certain
State-held and federal datasets must be made available on the open data system. While some State-held
data originate at a local level, such datasets are already publicly available, subject to Public Records Act
requests. In fact, the AB 1755 open data platform will enable further streamlining, and reduce duplication,
of State-mandated data reporting and reports from local agencies.

In cases where a State-held dataset represents information collected by locals, it is the responsibility of
the State data steward to ensure the dataset accurately reflects the local information and to identify
appropriate disclaimers and terms of use. Additionally, the State data steward would need to coordinate
with data originators to ensure that metadata documentation is complete and accurate.

The AB 1755 process is still evolving, and not all impacts on local agencies can be identified at this time.
Local agencies will be involved in developing future protocols, including protocols on data
standardization, quality control, and data security to assure that potential impacts are considered and to
exploit opportunities for local agencies to benefit.

What’s Next?
As described above, the Partner Agency Team, with robust engagement from external stakeholders, is
producing substantial accomplishments toward implementation of the Open and Transparent Water Data
Act since its passage in September 2016. Even so, much work remains to achieve the spirit of AB 1755
and accomplish the vision of useful data for sound, sustainable water management. A few of the steps the
Partner Agencies will take are outlined below, as well as opportunities for water resource decision-
makers, interested stakeholders, and the public to engage in AB 1755 implementation to help accelerate
progress.

Next Steps
As discussed above, the Partner Agencies are considering the findings and recommendations of the
Exploration of Governance and Funding Options report and are preparing a proposal to the
Administration describing a sustainable model for governance and funding for of the AB 1755 open data
platform. The proposal will be responsive to the needs of stakeholders, including federal, Tribal, State,
and local agencies involved in water management, as well as people affected by those decisions and the
consultants interested in creating solutions to California’s myriad water management challenges. After a



                                                     12
                                                                AB 1755: Open and Transparent Water Data Act



governance structure is selected and a new governance group is empowered, it will assess progress and
refine the path forward, as needed.

Until a formal governance model is in place, the Partner Agencies will continue to lead AB 1755
implementation and make progress through interagency implementation planning. The preliminary list of
projects shared earlier in this document is informative, and greater detail will be forthcoming to ensure
project success. The Partner Agencies will also continue working on projects already underway and will
launch planned projects to help meet legislative timelines and adhere to the spirit of AB 1755 —
improving water management in California.

How can you get involved?
There are many opportunities to be involved in this exciting opportunity to transform data management
and application in the State of California. Specific organized civic engagement opportunities are
available, including the California Safe Drinking Water Data Challenge 2018 and the interoperability
testbeds. Preliminary details of those events were included in respective earlier sections of this report, and
additional details will be forthcoming. Other opportunities include working on use cases and protocols
and using the AB 1755 platform.

As discussed earlier, use cases are a foundational component in connecting water management decision-
making to relevant data sources. While formal efforts to develop the initial 20 draft use cases are
complete, no use case is ever complete. Since water management decisions can evolve as new data
becomes available or new considerations come to light, so too must the use cases that support those
decisions. Admittedly, the 20 draft use cases included, by reference, in the Progress Report (January
2018) do not capture the range of decisions necessary to efficiently and effectively manage California’s
complex water landscape. The State must develop and maintain a library of use cases. Those interested in
water management decisions and the data that supports them are invited to review and suggest additions
or corrections to existing use cases, and create and submit additional use cases, as needed.

Protocols and data standards must adapt over time to ensure that the needs of data providers and data
consumers can be met. Three initial protocols have already been developed, available in the Progress
Report (January 2018), and other protocols are outlined in the OWIA or discussed in the Strategic Plan
(April 2018) and the Interagency Implementation Planning section of this report. All stakeholders are
encouraged to review available information for protocol(s) or data standard(s) of interest and suggest
additions and corrections to the existing content. Likewise, the Partner Agencies will gratefully accept
additional ideas for protocols and data standards beyond those already outlined. Please keep in mind that
the more specific the input, the greater the likelihood that we will be able to address your intent.

The Partner Agencies also invite all interested parties to make use of our existing federated open data
portals. The statewide open data portal, data.ca.gov, hosted by GovOps and the California Department of
Technology, and the CNRA Open Data Portal offer an extensive and growing list of resources, datasets,
and visualizations available to users interested in interacting with water and environmental data. Utilizing
these resources and providing feedback on both the data and interfaces is critical to ensuring that these
tools continue to meet the needs of decision makers in California.




                                                     13
Progress Report: April 2018



The Partner Agencies encourage all users to share with us their data stories and how they were, or were
not, able to utilize the data available on the open data portals. Interested parties may also get an early start
on developing decision support tools based on available use cases and datasets. Organizations with data
they want posted on one of the open data portals, or perhaps wanting to federate an existing data portal,
are encouraged to contact us at AB1755@water.ca.gov.

The Partner Agencies are also interested in establishing formal user groups and will compile names and
contact information for those who express interest in participating, as well as other ideas to enhance open
data use in California.

DWR maintains an AB 1755 program webpage with resources, announcements, and other information.
You may also wish to subscribe to the AB 1755 listserv by contacting us directly at
AB1755@water.ca.gov.




                                                       14
                                                            AB 1755: Open and Transparent Water Data Act




Useful Web Links
AB 1755 Program
      https://www.water.ca.gov/Programs/All-Programs/AB-1755

California Safe Drinking Water Data Challenge 2018
        https://twitter.com/hashtag/CaWaterDataChallenge?src=hash

CNRA Open Data Portal
     https://data.cnra.ca.gov/

Data for Water Decision Making
        https://www.law.berkeley.edu/research/clee/research/wheeler/data/

Exploration of Governance and Funding for Open and Transparent Water Data
       https://www.redstonestrategy.com/publications/ca-open-water-data/

Progress Report — Implementing the Open and Transparent Water Data Act with Initial Draft Strategic
Plan and Preliminary Protocols (January 2018)
        https://www.water.ca.gov/-/media/DWR-Website/Web-Pages/Programs/All-Programs/AB-
        1755/AB1755ProgressReportinitialdraft13018v42.pdf

Protocols for Assembly Bill 1755, the Open and Transparent Water Data Act (April 2018)
        https://www.water.ca.gov/-/media/DWR-Website/Web-Pages/Programs/All-Programs/AB-
        1755/Protocols-for-AB1755.pdf

Statewide Open Data Portal hosted by GovOps and the California Department of Technology
        https://data.ca.gov/

Strategic Plan for Assembly Bill 1755, the Open and Transparent Water Data Act (April 2018)
        https://www.water.ca.gov/-/media/DWR-Website/Web-Pages/Programs/All-Programs/AB-
        1755/Strategic-Plan-for-AB1755.pdf




                                                  15
Progress Report: April 2018




Acknowledgements
This report was developed through a collaborative process led by the AB1755 Partner Agency Team
reaching out to stakeholders who share interest in open and transparent water data for California. The
effort began in July 2017 and continues today. Following is a list of agencies, organization and
individuals who have provided invaluable input to this ongoing process.

AB 1755 Partner Agency Team
California Department of Fish and Wildlife
Steve Goldman
Tom Lupo
Karen Miner

California Department of Water Resources
Matt Correa
Gary Darling
Kamyar Guivetchi – AB1755 Program Sponsor
Julie Haas
Abdul Khan
Christina McCready – AB1755 Program Manager
Paul Shipman

California Natural Resources Agency
David Harris

California Water Quality Monitoring Council
Kristopher Jones
Nick Martorano

Delta Stewardship Council
George Isaac

Governor’s Office of Planning and Research
Ken Alex
Debbie Franco

Government Operations
Stuart Drown
Angelica Quirarte

State Water Resources Control Board
Greg Gearheart
Rafael Maestu



                                                    16
                                           AB 1755: Open and Transparent Water Data Act



AB1755 Collaborators
California Council on Science and Technology
Susan Hackwood
Brie Lindsey
Amber Mace
Shannon Muir

Center for Collaborative Policy
Ariel Ambruster
Alexandra Cole-Weiss

Delta Conservancy
Shakoora Azimi-Gaylon

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Debra Agarwal
Susan Hubbard
Peter Nico
Charu Varadharajan

Redstone Strategy Group
Nathan Huttner
Kathy King
John Whitney

San Diego Super Computer Center
John Helly
Michael Norman

S.D. Bechtel, Jr. Foundation
Joya Banerjee

University of California, Berkeley
Alida Cantor
Ronan Kennedy
Michael Kiparsky
Meredith Lee

University of California, Merced
Roger Bales
Leigh Bernacchi
Martha Conklin




                                     17
Progress Report: April 2018



University of California, Santa Barbara
Jeff Dozier

Water Foundation
Mike Myatt

OWIA Technical Working Group
Stephen Abrams, University of California
Deb Agarwal, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
Roger Bales, University of California, Merced
David Blodgett, U.S. Geological Survey
Martha Conklin, University of California, Merced
Matt Correa, California Department of Water Resources
Gary Darling, California Department of Water Resources
Greg Gearheart, California Water Boards
Kamyar Guivetchi, California Department of Water Resources
Tony Hale, San Francisco Estuary Institute
John Helly, University of California, San Diego
George Isaac, California Delta Stewardship Council
Sara Larsen, Western States Water Council
Christina McCready, California Department of Water Resources
Don Sullivan, NASA Ames
Dwane Young, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

Additional Contributors
Commenters on January 2018 Progress Report Implementing the Open and
Transparent Water Data Act with Initial Draft Strategic Plan and Preliminary
Protocols
Patrick Atwater – California Data Collaborative
Derek Borba – Borba Farms
John Callaway – Delta Stewardship Council
Paul Cook – Irvine Ranch Water District
Richard Harasick – Los Angeles Department of Water and Power
Thomas Jabusch – Sacramento - San Joaquin Delta Conservancy
Jessica Law – Delta Stewardship Council
Elizabeth Lovsted – Eastern Municipal Water District
Jay Lund – UC Davis
Cathleen Pieroni – City of San Diego
Max Stevenson - Yolo County Flood Control and Water Conservation District
Devendra Upadhyay – Metropolitan Water District

Publications and Editorial Services by California Department of Water
Resources
William O’Daly
Charlie Olivares
Scott Olling


                                                18
