        CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY
 2022
AUG     Adapting to a Hotter, Drier Future
                  I
                  ntr
                    oduct
                        ion
Ourcl
    imat ehaschanged.Wear  eexper
                                iencingextr
                                          eme,sus
                                                tained
dr
 oughtcondi t
            ionsi
                nCalif
                     orni
                        aandacr osstheAmer i
                                           canWest
caus
   edbyhot  t
            er,dr
                ierweather.Ourwarmingcli
                                       mat emeansthata
gr
 eatershareoftherainandsnowfallwereceivewil
                                          lbeabsorbedby
dr
 ysoil
     s,consumedbyt hi
                    rst
                      yplants
                            ,andevapor atedint
                                             otheair.T
                                                     his
l
eaveslesswatertomeetourneeds .
T
hisi
   sournew cl
            i
            mat
              ereal
                  i
                  ty,andwemus
                            tadapt
                                 .
Duringhi sfi
           rs
            tmont  hsi nof fi
                            ce,GovernorNews om isuedanexecut
                                                 s            ive
ordercal li
          ngonS  tat eAgenci  estocreateacompr  ehens veWat
                                                      i    er
Resil
    iencePor tfoli
                 o.T hePor  tf
                             oli
                               oprior
                                    it
                                     iz
                                      edkeyact  i
                                                onst osecur
                                                          e
Californi
        a’swat erf utur e.Overt helas
                                    ttwoyear swe’ vemademaj  or
progr essthatincludes  :wor ki
                             ngt obri
                                    ngourgroundwat  erbasi
                                                         nsinto
balance;updat   i
                ngi nf r
                       as tr
                           ucturetomovewat  erthr
                                                oughoutt hestate;
rest
   or i
      ngr i
          versystems  ,includingthenation’
                                         slargestdam r emoval
eff
  or tont heKlamat  hRi  ver;andimprovingwat ermanagement
thr
  oughnew vol   unt aryagr  eementsandt echnologyi nves
                                                      tments.

Cal
  i
  for
    niai
       sinvest
             i   l
                 l
              ngbii
                  onsofdoll
                          arsi
                             ntotheseact
                                       ions
t
osecuret
       hefutur
             eofCali
                   for
                     nia’
                        swatersupply.
Overt helastt hreeyear s,s
                         tateleader shaveear   markedmor  ethan
$8bi l
     li
      ontomoder    ni
                    zewat erinf
                              rastructureandmanagement     .The
his
  toricthr
         ee- year ,$5.2bil
                         l
                         ioninves t
                                  menti  nCal i
                                              forni
                                                  awat ersystems
enact edin2021-  22hasenabl edemer   gencydr  oughtrespons e,
i
mpr ovedwat   ercons ervati
                          ont ostretchwat  ersuppli
                                                  es,andenabl  ed
scoresofpr oject sbylocal watersuppl ierstobecomemor   er esi
                                                            li
                                                             entto
currentandf  uturedr oughts.T
                            he2022-  23budgeti  ncl
                                                  udesan
addi t
     ional$2.8bi ll
                  ionfordroughtr eli
                                   eft ohar d-
                                             hitcommuni  t
                                                         ies,water
cons ervat
         ion,envi  r
                   onment alprotect i
                                    onf orfi
                                           shandwi  l
                                                    dli
                                                      fe,and
l
ong- term project stopermanent lys t
                                   rengt hendr oughtresi
                                                       li
                                                        ence.

       CAL
         IFORNI
              A’SWAT
                   ERSUPPL
                         YST
                           RAT
                             EGY-ADAPT
                                     ING T
                                         O AHOT
                                              TER,DRI
                                                    ERF
                                                      UTURE-I
                                                            NTRODUCT
                                                                   ION-AUGUST2022
Overthelasttwoyears,sci
                      ent
                        is
                         tsandwat ermanagershavebeen
al
 armedbyt  heaccelerati
                      ngi
                        mpact softhewarmingcli
                                             mateon
ourwatersupply.Wenow know thathott
                                 eranddri
                                        erweather
coul
   ddimi ni
          shourexist
                   ingwatersupplybyupto10% by2040.
Sowear etakingacti
                 on.

Wehavei nves
           tedbil
                li
                 onsinsecur
                          ingthef
                                utur
                                   eofCalif
                                          orni
                                             a’s
waters
     upplyandt hi
                sfocusedWat erS
                              uppl
                                 yStr
                                    ategyupdates
st
 atepri
      ori
        ti
         esbasedonnew dat aandaccelerat
                                      ingcl
                                          imate
change.




 .
T
oens ur
      eCal
         if
          orniahast
                  hewat
                      erneededf
                              orgener
                                    ati
                                      onst
                                         ocome,
t
hisS
   trat
      egyi
         ncludes:

   Creat
       est
         oragespaceforupt
                        o4mill
                             i
                             onacr
                                 e-feetofwat
                                           er,



 .
   al
    lowi
       ngustocapit
                 ali
                   zeonbi
                        gst
                          ormswhentheydooccurand
   st
    orewat
         erfordr
               yperiods

   Recycl
        eandr euseatl
                    east800,
                           000acre-
                                  feetofwat
                                          erperyear



 .
   by2030,enabli
               ngbett
                    erands af
                            erus
                               eofwas tewat
                                          ercurr
                                               entl
                                                  y
   di
    schargedtotheocean

   Fr
    eeup500,000acre-feetofwat
                            ert
                              hroughmoreeff
                                          ici
                                            entwater



 .
   useandconservat
                 ion,helpi
                         ngmakeupf orwat
                                       erl
                                         ostdueto
   cl
    imatechange

   Makenew wat  eravail
                      ableforusebycapturi
                                        ngs t
                                            ormwaterand
   des
     alinati
           ngoceanwat  erands al
                               tywateri
                                      ngr oundwater
   bas
     ins,diver
             si
              fyingsuppli
                        esandmaki ngthemos tofhi
                                               ghflows
   dur
     ingstorm events

Tomat chthepaceofcl i
                    matechange,Cal if
                                    orniamustmove
smart
    erandf as
            tertoupdateourwat ersys
                                  tems .Themoderni
                                                 zati
                                                    on
ofourwatersys
            temswillhel
                      prepleni
                             shthewat erCali
                                           forni
                                               awil
                                                  ll
                                                   os e
duetohotter
          ,dri
             erweather,andgenerateenoughwat  erf
                                               or
morethan8.4mi l
              l
              ionhouseholds
                          .

     CAL
       IFORNI
            A’SWAT
                 ERSUPPL
                       YST
                         RAT
                           EGY-ADAPT
                                   ING T
                                       O AHOT
                                            TER,DRI
                                                  ERF
                                                    UTURE-I
                                                          NTRODUCT
                                                                 ION-AUGUST2022
   CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY
   Adapting to a Hotter, Drier Future
   This document outlines California’s strategy and priority actions to adapt and
   protect water supplies in an era of rising temperatures.
   Over the next 20 years, California could lose 10 percent1 of its water supplies.
   Our climate has changed, and the West continues to get hotter and drier. As it does, we will
   see on average less snowfall, more evaporation, and greater consumption of water by
   vegetation, soil, and the atmosphere itself.
                                                 ADAPTATION SUPPLIES
             WATER SUPPLY WITH NO ACTIONS                                            Increased Water Recycling
                                                                                     Increased Desalination
                                                                                     Expanded Storage Above and Below Ground
     USABLE
      WATER                                                                          Increased Stormwater Capture
                 2012-2016          2020-?                                           Increased Conservation
                  Drought          Drought            2030s            2040s
                                                                                     Note: bars are conceptual, not an absolute scale.

   In previous droughts the ratio of precipitation to evaporation to runoff has been similar.
   However, as temperatures rise, evaporation increases, with the consequence of a fall in runoff.
   As average temperatures continue to increase, the increase in evaporation will continue, with a
   concurrent drop in runoff.




P R E C I P I TAT
   The coming water cycle: the air claims more
   In the water cycle, evaporation lifts moisture into clouds




                                                                                                                    ION
   that drop precipitation, as rain or snow. This water becomes
   runoff that courses downhill on the surface, or into the soil to                      P R E C I P I TAT
   become groundwater.                                                                                                                   ION
                            A P O R ATION
                         EV


                                                                                  N O F F
                                                                               RU

                                                                       Rising temperatures evaporate more water, but
                                                                       more of that water stays in the air. Thirsty soils
                                                                       retain more runoff, and more use of groundwater
                                                                       requires more water for recharging watertables.
 1 DWR estimates a 10% reduction in water supply by 2040. This is a planning scenario that considers increased temperatures and decreased
 runoff due to a thirstier atmosphere, plants, and soils. According to the California Water Plan Update, California’s managed water supply
 ranges from 60-90 MAF per year so the effect of a drier climate results in a disappearance of about 6-9 MAF of water supply.


   CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE                                        PAGE 1 of 16 AUGUST 2022
California’s precipitation always has swung between drought and flood. Those swings
are becoming more severe. Regardless of drought or flood, in this changed climate
there will be less water available for people to use than there would have been in a
cooler climate because of the way plants, soils, and the atmosphere use water as
temperatures rise.
The volume of water used by people in California for agriculture, urban, and
environmental purposes ranges from 60 million acre-feet per year to 90 million acre-feet
per year. A loss of 10 percent of that volume to hotter, drier conditions could mean the
disappearance of about six million acre-feet to nine million acre-feet of water supply.
For comparison’s sake, California’s largest reservoir – Shasta – holds 4.5 million acre-feet.
Water underpins much of what we care about as Californians. To thrive and grow as a
state, we will have to make up for a loss of supply. We must innovate, conserve, store,
reuse, and repurpose water.
This document outlines four sets of actions the State will pursue to prepare California for
its new climate reality.
These targeted actions aim to secure supplies for people, so that homes, schools, and
businesses do not suffer disruptions, and the state’s agricultural economy continues
to thrive.
In concert with these actions, the State is working to protect fish and wildlife populations
by removing stream barriers, restoring aquatic habitat, bolstering stream flows at
ecologically important times, and expanding floodplains and wetlands.
The State also continues to make progress extending clean, safe drinking water to all
Californians; in the last three years, the number of people impacted by failing water
systems has fallen from 1.6 million to 934,000, and the state has delivered emergency
drinking water assistance to 9,456 households and 150 water systems in this drought.
The actions in this strategy aim primarily to support the urban and suburban water
systems that serve most Californians and to stabilize water supplies for agriculture. But
benefits from these actions will extend to environmental protection and fulfillment of the
right of every Californian to safe drinking water, and the State continues to advance
those efforts apart from this strategy.

How California is taking action to protect community water supplies
The Water Resilience Portfolio has guided State water policy since July 2020 and will
continue to do so. It is a comprehensive suite of actions that support local water
resilience. However, the record-breaking temperatures and aridity of the 2012-16
drought, followed so closely by another stretch of similar conditions beginning in the
winter of 2020-21, send a strong climate signal that we must heed. These new, more
extreme conditions make clear that to secure water supplies, we must double down on
a set of actions within the Water Resilience Portfolio, with haste.
Executing this strategy will require coordination with local, tribal, and federal partners to:
 1) Develop new water through recycling and desalination.


CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 2 of 16 AUGUST 2022
 2) Capture and save more stormwater, above ground and below ground.
 3) Reduce use of water in cities and on farms.
 4) Improve all water management actions with better data, forecasting,
    conveyance, and administration of water rights.

1. Develop New Water Supplies
   Investments in wastewater recycling and desalination technology can help drought-
   proof communities.

1.1 Reuse at least 800,000 acre-feet of water per year by 2030 and 1.8 million acre-
   feet by 2040, with most of that additional recycling involving direct wastewater
   discharges that are now going to the ocean.



Closing the evaporative gap
To offset increased evaporation tied to warmer average temperatures, California must
capture, recycle, de-salt, and conserve more water.
                                   Increase
                                 Conservation
                                                 Halt Irrigation
                                               of Marginal Lands
                          Increase
                        Stormwater
                          Capture




                                                                                          Expand Storage
       Increase                                       Increase                           Above and Below
   Desal Production                                Recycled Water                            Ground


                                                                              2030                     2040
                                       Increase Recycled Water          .8 MAF                  1.8 MAF
                                     Increase Desal Production        28,000 AF                84,000 AF
                                  Increase Stormwater Capture          .25 MAF                   .5 MAF
                                          Increase Conservation         .5 MAF       About       .5 MAF       About
                                                                                     5 MAF                    7 MAF
SUBTOTAL FOR RECYCLED, DESAL, STORMWATER AND CONSERVATION              1.6 MAF                  2.9 MAF
                   Expand Storage Above and Below Ground*              3.7 MAF                   4 MAF
                                                             Total     4.8 MAF                  6.9 MAF
         *Additional storage capacity does not equate to a similar volume of new water supply. MAF – million acre-feet.


CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE                PAGE 3 of 16 AUGUST 2022
Currently, recycled water offsets about nine percent of the state’s water demand,
about 728,000 acre-feet per year. The State Water Resources Control Board (State Water
Board) has invested a total of $1.8 billion in recycled water projects statewide over
the last five years that are in various stages of development. Once completed, those
projects will generate an additional 124,000 acre-feet of new water supply.
Approximately 1.5 million acre-feet per year of treated wastewater is currently
discharged to California’s ocean waters. Not all of this can be recycled, as some
water is needed to discharge brine, and wastewater in some places provides critical
streamflow for fish and wildlife. But in many places, communities can tap this resource to
build water supply resilience.
Current regulations enable communities to use recycled water for drinking via a
reservoir or aquifer, and in 2023, the State Water Board will establish direct potable reuse
regulations that allow suppliers to distribute recycled water without first putting it into a
reservoir or aquifer.
Implementation Steps:
■ The State will consider greater investments and leverage federal dollars where possible
  to build on the $3.2 billion in financing for water recycling projects that the State Water
  Board has provided to 94 projects since 2012. At roughly $15,000 an acre-foot, it would
  require a state, local, and federal investment of approximately $10 billion to achieve
  the 2030 goal and $27 billion to achieve the 2040 goal of recycling an additional 1.8
  million acre-feet of water.
■ By January 1, 2024, the State Water Board will work with local water and sanitation
  agencies to identify recycled water projects that hold the potential to be operational
  by 2030 and by no later than 2040.
■ The State Water Board will formalize a process currently underway by convening a strike
  team to identify and resolve permitting and funding obstacles.
■ The State Water Board will track the permitting and funding status of recycled water
  projects with a public, digital dashboard.
■ The State will support local water sustainability plans that include water recycling,
  including (but not limited to):
 ■ Operation NEXT/Hyperion 2035 (City of Los Angeles)
 ■ Pure Water San Diego (City of San Diego)
 ■ Integrated Water Resources Plan and Climate Action Plan (Metropolitan Water District
   of Southern California)
 ■ Water Supply Management Program 2040 (East Bay Municipal Utility District)
■ The State Water Board will act on direct potable reuse regulations by December 2023.

1.2 Expand brackish groundwater desalination production by 28,000 acre-feet per
   year by 2030 and 84,000 acre-feet per year by 2040 and help guide location of
   seawater desalination projects where they are cost effective and environmentally
   appropriate.

CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 4 of 16 AUGUST 2022
There are 14 seawater desalination plants across the state, with a combined production
capacity of approximately 89,000 acre-feet per year. Some are not operating at full
capacity and could be positioned to generate additional water supplies in drought,
much as “peaker” power plants operate in short bursts to support electricity reliability
at times of peak demand. Another 23 brackish groundwater desalination plants have
a combined production capacity of 139,627 acre-feet per year. Brackish groundwater
requires significantly less energy to treat than seawater.
Proposals to build desalination projects along the coast must be approved under the
Coastal Act, in addition to other regulatory requirements. As California becomes hotter
and drier, we must become more resourceful with the strategic opportunity that 840
miles of ocean coastline offer to build water resilience.
Implementation Steps:
■ By January 1, 2024, the Department of Water Resources (DWR) and the State Water
  Board, in coordination with local agencies, will identify the brackish desalination
  projects that have the potential to be operational by 2030 and by no later than 2040.
  The State will consider investing in grants to local agencies for planning and building
  desalination projects.
■ By January 1, 2024, the State Water Board will review groundwater basins impaired
  by salts and nutrients and determine the volume of water available for brackish
  groundwater desalination.
■ As the State’s representative on the U.S. Department of Energy’s five-year, $100 million
  desalination innovation hub, DWR will continue to guide research investments towards
  technological breakthroughs that solve California desalination challenges.
■ The State will help streamline and expedite permitting to provide better clarity and
  certainty to further desalination projects. To this end, by June 30, 2023, the State Water
  Board, Coastal Commission, DWR and other State entities (e.g. State Lands Commission)
  will develop criteria for siting of desalination facilities along the coast and recommend
  new standards to facilitate approval.
■ Within the following year, these agencies will identify potential available mitigation sites
  to facilitate the expedited approval of desalination facilities. The State Water Board will
  consider amendments to the Desalination Policy in its Ocean Plan to streamline permits
  that meet the recommended siting and design standards for projects located in the
  identified priority areas.

2. Expand Water Storage Capacity Above and Below Ground by Four
Million Acre-Feet.
While creating more space to store water in reservoirs and aquifers does not create
more precipitation, and though having enough rain and snowfall to fill storage space is
out of our control, we need diversion infrastructure, more places to park runoff, and the
conveyance to eventually move the water to where it is needed to take advantage of
fast-moving storms. Expanding storage capacity improves the ability to capture runoff



CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 5 of 16 AUGUST 2022
when diversions cause the least harm to the environment. Furthermore, apart from a
hotter and drier climate, capturing water runoff is needed to help correct decades of
over-pumping of groundwater basins.

2.1 Expand average annual groundwater recharge by at least 500,000 acre-feet.
Vast capacity to store water exists underground in California. Intentional, directed
recharge of groundwater is one of the fastest, most economical, and widely available
ways to harness the bounty of wet years to cope with dry years. It has the additional
advantage of helping to halt or prevent land surface collapse due to over-pumping,
which can damage roads, canals, and bridges. Expanding groundwater recharge
requires adherence to laws, so that the environment and water users upstream and
downstream are not harmed when streamflow is directed underground. With the
multi-faceted suite of actions below, the State intends to help local water agencies
to accelerate the pace and scale of groundwater recharge. These actions center on
helping local agencies understand the best locations for recharge, analyze the impact
of their recharge proposals on the environment and other water users, and expeditiously
permit their projects.
Local agencies are developing groundwater recharge projects around the state. By
the end of next year, the State cumulatively will have invested $350 million in local
assistance for recharge projects. In planning documents, local agencies have proposed
more than 340 new recharge projects that, if built, could result in as much as 2.2 million
acre-feet of additional stored water in a single wet year by 2030. Until those projects
are permitted, it is unclear how much water those projects will have the capacity to
divert to underground storage; multiple proposals may rely on the same sources of
unappropriated water. But an additional 500,000 acre-feet is a reasonable estimate
of the additional average annual recharge volume that may be obtained after these
projects are vetted, permitted, and constructed.
California must be ready to respond to future wet winters. Fortunately, several processes
already are in place that could be used to divert water from high-flow events to
underground storage. Additional outreach, education, and technical assistance will be
critical for preparing diverters for a potentially wet winter so that permits can be put in
place before the start of the rainy season.
Should local actions become too fragmented or inefficient to maximize recharge
opportunities, the state should consider a coordinated, state-level approach to provide
for orderly, efficient disbursement of rights to high winter flows.
Implementation Steps: To help achieve this target, DWR and the State Water Board
will continue to provide regulatory and technical assistance to local agencies that
have received State funds to ensure that groundwater recharge project proponents
can successfully navigate the regulatory processes. The State will weigh the following
actions. Some would require additional investments and, possibly, regulatory changes.
■ Outreach:
 ■ DWR and the State Water Board will conduct a series of outreach activities to
   highlight temporary permitting pathways in advance of winter, to assess the status of

CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 6 of 16 AUGUST 2022
   proposed recharge projects, and to better align state and local agencies to advance
   groundwater recharge. The outreach would focus on the use of an existing 180-
   day temporary permit process and would note that permit applications should be
   received no later than October 1 to be ready for diversions in January.
 ■ By December 2022, DWR will evaluate a process whereby it files for 180-day temporary
   permits in certain watersheds on behalf of local agencies, in order to advance the
   development of the permit terms and conditions. DWR also would pay the filing fee,
   which could help facilitate local willingness to participate.
Technical Assistance:
 ■ DWR will provide outreach and assistance to help connect potential diverters with
   State Water Board permitting staff to answer specific questions and provide information
   that enables effective permit applications.
 ■ By October 2022, the State Water Board water right permitting staff will prioritize
   groundwater recharge permits.
■ Incentives:
 ■ The State will weigh immediate and long-term incentives for recharge project
   applicants to pursue the State Water Board’s streamlined recharge permitting
   pathway. Incentives could include:
 ■ Waiving of application costs partially or fully for a two-year period.
 ■ Connecting infrastructure funding to applications that use the State Water Board’s
   streamlined underground storage permitting approach.
 ■ Prioritization of State funding for groundwater recharge projects that target high-
   flow events, which raise fewer concerns about the environment and other water
   right holders than projects that seek to capture water in “shoulder” seasons of spring,
   summer, and fall.
 ■ DWR will expand its watershed modeling tools to better assess water available for
   recharge on a watershed basis.
■ Regulatory Streamlining:
 ■ The State will streamline water right permits for recharge projects receiving DWR grants
   or conducted under DWR’s Flood-Managed Aquifer Recharge Program.
 ■ The State Water Board will develop permanent regulations for water availability
   analyses that specify methodologies, data, and alternatives for conducting
   such analyses.
 ■ The Administration will pursue legislation to revise the water right application process to
   deliver decisions more quickly.
■ State Administration of Potential Recharge Flows:
 ■ DWR and the State Water Board will develop a mechanism to create a more
   consistent, economical, and equitable approach for allocation of water rights for
   groundwater recharge. The initial proposal would focus on the State securing all
   reasonably available future flood flows in the Central Valley, allowing the State to

CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 7 of 16 AUGUST 2022
   then allocate the available water in an orderly, holistic, equitable, and integrated
   approach. The process would:
   ■ Level the playing field for local agencies, especially those that lack the resources to
     navigate the water right process.
   ■ Set clear water availability metrics for every potential applicant, allowing for fair
     comparisons among applicants.
   ■ Address equity concerns, including, for example, the need to protect domestic
     wells or abate subsidence.
   ■ Leverage other funding opportunities.
   ■ Spur tight coordination between the State Water Board and DWR in the allocation
     of water rights.

2.2 Work with local proponents to complete the seven Proposition 1-supported storage
    projects and consider funding other viable surface storage projects.
Seven locally-driven projects are underway to increase the state’s overall capacity to
store water by 2.77 million acre-feet – nearly three times the capacity of Folsom Lake.
The seven projects are on track to receive a combined $2.7 billion in state funding
from Proposition 1, the 2014 water bond, once they meet the requirements imposed
in the bond law. Four of the projects involve groundwater storage and three involve
creation of a new or expanded reservoir. Two of these seven projects are likely to begin
construction next year. Project proponents are working now to obtain permits, arrange
financing, finalize environmental documents, and negotiate contracts with state agencies
for the delivery of public benefits from the projects, including environmental flows.
Implementation Steps:
■ To formalize, streamline and continue existing efforts, the California Natural Resources
  Agency and the California Environmental Protection Agency will establish an
  interagency strike team to facilitate state permitting and support completion of these
  projects.
■ Water Commission staff will continue to monitor development of the seven Proposition 1
  projects closely.
■ Permit teams from the California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW) and the State
  Water Board will continue working with applicants and with other state agencies to
  inform and advance the development of contracts for administration of public benefits.
■ Water Commission, DWR, CDFW, and State Water Board teams will continue robust
  coordination. and working with applicants to draft and execute contracts for
  administration of public benefits.

2.3 Expand San Luis Reservoir by 135,000 acre-feet.
The federal government is proposing to expand San Luis Reservoir in Merced County
to capture more winter storm runoff. In extremely wet years like 2017, San Luis fills and
California misses an opportunity to capture and store even more water for use during


CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 8 of 16 AUGUST 2022
subsequent dry years. The project would expand the capacity of the
two-million acre-foot reservoir by 130,000 acre-feet -- enough to supply nearly 400,000
homes a year. DWR is working with the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) on
this proposed project and sees it as an important part of a set of inter-related joint
projects to benefit the Central Valley Project and State Water Project, which include
upgrading the San Luis Reservoir dam for earthquake safety, modernizing conveyance
of water through the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, and restoring capacity lost due to
subsidence at major Central Valley canals.
Implementation Steps:
■ In December 2019, Reclamation and DWR announced a partnership to move forward
  on the seismic upgrade. Reclamation and DWR celebrated the groundbreaking of the
  project in June 2022. Construction is expected to finish in 2028. DWR will continue to
  work with Reclamation to complete the seismic upgrade and expansion.

2.4 Rehabilitate dams to regain storage capacity.
As of May, 112 California dams are rated “less than satisfactory” by State dam
inspectors, and the reservoirs behind 41 of those dams cannot be filled beyond a certain
level in order to protect public safety. The loss of storage is about 350,000 acre-feet per
year. Accelerating dam safety repairs would help local water districts regain lost storage
capacity and improve public safety. While this has historically been a federal or local
obligation, the Legislature and Administration enacted additional funding to support
dam owners faced with costly repairs.
Implementation Steps:
■ DWR will administer the $100 million in the 2022-23 budget for local dam safety projects
  and flood management.

2.5 Support local stormwater capture projects in cities and towns with the goal to
    increase annual supply capacity by at least 250,000 acre-feet by 2030 and 500,000
    acre-feet by 2040.
Over the last 30 years, an average of approximately 324,000 acre-feet of stormwater a
year has been captured and recharged in communities in the South Coast alone. While
this value varies from year to year, during the exceptionally wet winter of 2004-05 over
900,000 acre-feet of runoff was captured and infiltrated into the local groundwater basins.
The size, cost, and feasibility of stormwater capture projects vary greatly by location. It is
extremely difficult for stormwater agencies to accurately measure stormwater capture
volume and to predict potential due to uncertainties with annual precipitation.
Implementation Steps:
■ Through permitting and funding, the State will incentivize local agencies to develop
  stormwater capture projects and help offset the cost of completing these projects,
  including through stormwater crediting systems to encourage public-private
  partnerships.



CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 9 of 16 AUGUST 2022
■ The State Water Board will hire a contractor to provide an estimate of current
  stormwater capture and use statewide and then re-evaluate every five years progress
  towards the 2030 and 2040 goals.

3. Reduce Demand
3.1 Build upon the conservation achievements of the last two decades to reduce annual
    water demand in towns and cities by at least half a million acre-feet by 2030.
During the 2012-2016 drought, Californians did their part to conserve water, with many
taking permanent actions that continue to yield benefits; per capita residential water
use statewide declined 21 percent between the years 2013 and 2016 and has remained
on average 16 percent below 2013 levels as of 2020. Californians need to step up again
in this current drought. The State set a target of 15 percent for statewide conservation.
Californians have made progress toward that goal in the summer of 2022, but more is
needed to cope with the intense drought at hand and for the long term.
California enacted laws in 2018 to set new efficiency standards for how people use
water in homes and businesses in ways that make sense in each region. These standards
will drive fully-efficient water use in communities and eliminate water waste, even as
communities continue to grow. The 2018 legislation calls for these standards to be
met by 2030. The State Water Board is on track to set those new standards, informed
by extensive data collection and analysis and recommendations from DWR. The
recommended standards for indoor and outdoor water use for residential, commercial,
industrial, and institutional water use could save 450,000 acre-feet per year starting in
2030. This amount of water would support 1.35 million homes, and the savings would
prevent urban water use from rising as much as it would otherwise as population
grows and more housing is built. These new standards would not apply to individual
Californians, but local water suppliers must ensure the standards are met.
Given the acute need to conserve water in a potentially fourth dry year, the State
Water Board will develop emergency conservation measures that would expedite
implementation of conservation in a way that is already mandated through the 2018
laws. If drought conditions persist, the new short-term requirements could take effect
no later than spring 2023. The new requirements would consider the relative efficiency
of each supplier. These new efficiency targets would therefore work as a bridge to take
California from voluntary measures to efficiency-based, water-use budgets that account
for differences in climate zones, landscape area, population, and other factors.
In addition, the Administration sponsors a robust campaign to motivate urban
Californians to save water and is working to accelerate the transition of turf to
landscapes that use less water. To this end, the State will partner with local agencies
to convert 500 million square feet of ornamental turf by 2030, with corresponding
investments in programs and policies that incentivize turf conversion. Removal of 500
million square feet of turf could generate 66,000 acre-feet of water savings each year at
an estimated cost of $1 billion.



CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 10 of 16 AUGUST 2022
Implementation Steps:
■ The State Water Board will develop short-term efficiency-based conservation targets for
  every urban retail water supplier based on their unique characteristics like climate zone,
  water demand, residential landscape area, and population. The Board will compare
  water suppliers’ actual use to their estimated efficient use target and assign them a
  percent reduction, with a higher reduction target for suppliers whose actual use is
  further from their efficient use target.
■ DWR and the State Water Board will target grants to help local water districts achieve
  efficiency targets, using funding recently approved by the Legislature.
■ The State-run Save Our Water campaign will continue to educate Californians about
  the severity of the current drought and the need to make water conservation a
  permanent, daily practice.
■ DWR will establish a grant program to support local efforts to replace ornamental turf
  with drought-tolerant landscaping and—where schools and parks require turf—to
  make turf irrigation and maintenance more efficient, with a focus on disadvantaged
  communities.
■ The State Water Board will advance adoption of new long-term water use efficiency
  standards, per existing statute (2018).
  ■ Once DWR provides its formal recommendations, the State Water Board will begin the
    process for enacting the regulation to ensure the rule will be in effect by January 1, 2024.

3.2 Help stabilize groundwater supplies for all groundwater users, including a more
    drought-resilient agricultural economy.
California irrigated agricultural acreage declined by 1 million acres between 2002 and
2017. The approximately eight million acres of irrigated farm and ranchland will shrink by
at least an estimated additional 500,000 acres to one million acres between now and
2040 as local agencies transition to groundwater use that is sustainable over coming
decades. The conserved water should support a more drought-resilient agricultural
economy that retains its vitality.
Implementation Steps:
The State will:
■ Continue to implement the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act (SGMA) to
  protect communities, agriculture, and the environment against prolonged dry periods
  and climate change, preserving water supplies for existing and potential beneficial use.
■ Support local water demand management that includes changes to cropping patterns
  and fallowing by building upon this year’s investment of $40 million in grants to regional
  organizations working to reduce groundwater reliance and create local environmental
  and economic opportunities through land-use changes.
■ Continue to support conservation and water efficiency practices by agricultural
  producers.
■ Support flexibility in local land use decisions to protect beneficial uses and users.

CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 11 of 16 AUGUST 2022
■ Continue direct investment and technical assistance in drought relief for agriculture
  with dedicated funding to assist socially disadvantaged and underserved populations.

4. Improve Forecasting, Data, and Management, including Water Rights
Modernization
Crucial to achieving the water supply actions described here is a common, readily-
available set of facts about water supply and use, better forecasting, and integrated use
of data and technology. Water rights modernization and reform are critical to ensuring we
can efficiently and effectively adapt to a changing climate.

4.1 Improve data collection and modernize forecasts for a changed climate.
Sierra snowpack provides about a third of the water people use in California, yet the
existing approach to forecasting snowmelt runoff dates to the 1950s.
To account for climate change, we must simulate the physics of interactions among
the atmosphere, water as rain or snow, and the land surface – and we need to do this
for individual watersheds, incorporating site-specific features like slope orientation and
depth of soil. This requires timely data collection.
Implementation Steps:
The State will:
■ Continue to invest in the human and technical resources needed to improve
  predictions and forecasting for water supply planning.
■ Advance a multi-agency effort to install 430 new stream gages and upgrade or re-
  activate 200 more across the state. These gages provide real-time surface water data
  for enhanced drought management and flood response.
■ Work with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers leadership to accelerate the pace at which
  the manuals guiding reservoir operations are updated to reflect a changed climate.

4.2 Improve the flexibility of current water systems to move water throughout the state.
California depends upon aging, damaged, or increasingly risk-prone infrastructure to
transport water between different areas of the state. Modern infrastructure and tighter
coordination between the state’s two major water projects would expand capacity to
move water when it is available.
The state and federal water projects are fed by levee-lined channels in the Sacramento-
San Joaquin Delta. This Delta infrastructure faces serious threat of failure due to storm
surge, sea level rise, and earthquakes that could collapse levees. Loss of this water
supply for any amount of time poses significant risk to farms, businesses, and most
California homes. South of the Delta, major canals have been damaged by subsidence
caused by the over-pumping of groundwater, restricting the capacity to move water
when it is available.
DWR proposes to modernize State Water Project (SWP) conveyance in the Delta. Had
the proposed project been operational in 2021, the project could have captured and


CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 12 of 16 AUGUST 2022
moved an additional 236,000 acre-feet of water into San Luis Reservoir during that
winter’s few large storms.
Administrative hurdles also limit flexibility to move water. Every year for the last 10
years, the federal and state water projects have applied to the State Water Board for
temporary flexibility in the locations where water diverted by either project may be used.
These “consolidations of the authorized places of use” of the SWP and the Central Valley
Project last only a year and require repetitive work by all parties involved. A permanent
change to allow for consolidated place of use among the projects would make water
transfers easier and lay the groundwork for discussions about future operation of the two
projects.
Implementation Steps:
■ DWR will advance the design of and the draft environmental impact report for the
  proposed Delta conveyance project, which would construct new intakes along the
  Sacramento River and a tunnel under the Delta to safeguard SWP deliveries and
  ensure that the SWP can make the most of big but infrequent storm events.
■ DWR will disburse $100 million included in the 2022-23 state budget to support costs of
  repairing four major San Joaquin Valley canals damaged by subsidence.
■ DWR and the State Water Board will chart a work plan to address the resources
  needed for preparation, submittal, and consideration of a joint place of use petition
  from the federal and state water projects.

4.3 Modernize water rights administration for equity, access, flexibility, and
   transparency.
The foundation of how California manages water rights dates to the Gold Rush and has
not evolved in step with changing public values and management needs. The State
Water Board is challenged to provide timely, useful, and meaningful information to
guide state and local water management decisions, which are especially vital during
periods of drought.
Other western states including Washington, Oregon, Nevada, and Idaho manage water
diversions much more nimbly than California, which puts them in better position to adjust
to what many call “aridification” – the transition to a drier climate. The ability to adjust
diversions quickly also is crucial to protecting fish and wildlife, other water right holders,
and public health. To make a century-old water right system work in this new era, the
State Water Board needs accurate and timely data, modern data infrastructure, and
increased capacity to halt water diversions when the flows in streams diminish. These
improvements are a necessary predicate to modernize our water rights system in a
manner that respects water right priorities and aligns with current public values and
needs.
Implementation Steps:
The State Water Board will:
■ Continue to build upon efforts started last summer with the investment of $30 million to
  digitize existing paper records and rebuild the state’s water right data management system.

CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 13 of 16 AUGUST 2022
■ Develop pilot projects in two or three watersheds over the next five years to collect real-
  time diversion data and integrate the data into the State Water Board’s water rights
  data system, with lessons learned and outcomes used to inform statewide tools needed
  for administering an efficient and effective water rights system.
■ Develop data and analytical tools for implementing the water right priority system for
  an estimated 10 to 15 watersheds.
■ Support modeling staff to develop more robust supply/demand models for the Delta
  watershed.
■ Consider adopting regulations that would allow for curtailments of water rights in
  years when there is not a declared drought emergency. The State currently lacks the
  authority in most years to implement the priority water rights system without a declared
  drought emergency.
■ Support enforcement staff to help address illegal and unauthorized diversions during dry
  conditions.
■ Consider regulations, legislation, and pursuing resources needed to streamline and
  modernize the water right system, clarify senior water rights, and establish more
  equitable fees.

Why target these actions?
The last three years of record-breaking drought made painfully real the hotter, drier
pressures on water systems. These four major sets of actions would put to use water that
would otherwise be unusable, stretch supplies with efficiency, and expand our capacity
to bank water from big storms for dry times. They are designed, in other words, for a
climate prone to weather whiplash.
These actions alone will not eliminate local water supply risk. The variability of rain
and snow is too great, as is the uncertainty about which projects local agencies will
implement. These actions aim to spur local agency adaptation to a new reality and
change the way the State does business in order to better support local and regional
water management efforts.

Who will carry out this strategy?
The state and federal governments each operate large water delivery systems in
California, but local water districts and counties have primary responsibility for getting
supplies to homes and businesses. Thousands of local and regional entities play a role in
water management. Implementation of this strategy will require decisive state action.
It will also require partnerships, as local agency leaders, federal partners, farmers, other
business owners, and individual Californians are essential actors in carrying out this plan.
To ensure successful implementation in such a decentralized system, the State must
lead, set goals, provide incentives, and be prepared to exert greater authority when
necessary.
The State will prioritize its funds and human resources to support local projects that satisfy
state planning and permitting requirements to protect natural resources and help us

CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 14 of 16 AUGUST 2022
collectively reach the targets outlined above. The State will invest in forecasting and
data and water right administration – including real-time tracking of water use – to
improve all water management actions by state, local, federal, and private entities. The
State will also ensure that California’s response advances equity and takes into account
communities that are most at risk from climate change and that have experienced
environmental injustices.
Water affordability is key to ensuring the human right to water – established in California
law -- in the face of a hotter, drier state. The State has made strides in promoting
affordability through provision of low-interest loans and grants to support infrastructure
and planning for water systems, and by addressing pandemic-related water debt.
However, the increased investments in infrastructure necessary to meet our future water
supply needs will put additional pressure on affordability. The State will identify how
best to support low-income households and address community affordability of water
systems. Electric and communication utilities have programs to ease cost burdens on
low-income members of the community, and it is important to address this in the water
utility sector in a way that is workable and sustainable from a state budget perspective.
Where local agencies fail to build water resilience, the State will exert greater regulatory
authority or work with the Legislature to gain authority to do so.

Moving Smarter and Faster
Climate change uniquely affects California’s regions. This document articulates
statewide targets for certain water management strategies, but achieving those
overarching goals requires solutions at the local level, where the opportunities and
challenges of each watershed vary tremendously. To encourage collaboration across
watersheds that leads to greater statewide water resilience, the State will work with
stakeholders and the Legislature to create:
■ A funding program that incentivizes water users to develop regional targets for
  recycling, desalination, storage, efficiency, and other water management strategies.
■ An expedited permitting path for water projects that help regions achieve those
  targets.
In order to deliver the pace and scale of projects necessary to meet this unprecedented
climate challenge, we must modernize regulatory structures and expand staff capacity
so that State agencies can assess, permit, fund and implement projects at the pace this
climate emergency warrants.
The Administration will work with the Legislature and stakeholders to pursue the following:
■ A more expeditious process for completing, reviewing and finalizing California
  Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) reviews and Water Code proceedings for critical
  water infrastructure projects to build drought and flood resilience.
■ A voluntary permitting process for water infrastructure projects administered by the
  Governor’s Office of Planning and Research (OPR). State agencies would retain
  authority to review, identify, and address environmental impacts, but the OPR would
  expedite the collective permitting process. This proposed process would not be an

CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 15 of 16 AUGUST 2022
   option for water projects already under environmental review. The Administration would
   work with the Legislature to determine eligibility criteria for this voluntary process.
 ■ Legislation, where appropriate, and regulations that would allow for curtailments
   of water rights in years when there is not a declared drought emergency. The State
   currently lacks the authority in most years to implement the priority water rights system
   without a declared drought emergency.
 The Administration will:
 ■ Develop water availability analysis guidelines for water right applications that account
   for high-flow periods on fully appropriated streams and the way climate change is
   shifting the seasonality and intensity of runoff. Develop permanent State Water Board
   regulations that specify the data and methodologies to be used for conducting such
   analyses in order to remove the current ambiguity about regulatory requirements.
 ■ Establish a State Water Board, DWR and the California Department of Food and
   Agriculture “Groundwater Recharge Coordinating Committee” to jointly implement the
   groundwater recharge initiatives.
 ■ Establish programmatic permitting for projects of a similar nature (such as water
   recycling or habitat restoration) in order to lower costs, simplify process, and speed
   permit approval.
 ■ Institutionalize early alignment and regular internal coordination across state agencies
   on the permitting of water supply adaptation projects.

 Conclusion
 The world is getting hotter. The increased heat will intensify the natural swings in
 California’s climate and shrink water supplies. Targeted state funds and focus will
 support local efforts to conserve, capture, recycle, and de-salt enough water to allow
 California communities to prosper in a hotter, drier climate.




CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 16 of 16 AUGUST 2022




CALIFORNIA’S WATER SUPPLY STRATEGY - ADAPTING TO A HOTTER, DRIER FUTURE   PAGE 16 of 16 AUGUST 2022
