Photo: Kelly M. Grow/Department of Water Resources




Advisory Council Members

       John Callaway            Delta Stewardship Council
       Adrian Covert            Bay Area Council
       Stuart Drown             California Government Operations Agency
       Joaquin Esquivel         State Water Resources Control Board
       Debbie Franco            Governor’s Office of Planning and Research
       Kamyar Guivetchi         California Department of Water Resources
       Maurice Hall             Environmental Defense Fund
       Meredith Lee             West Big Data Innovation Hub
       Joone Lopez              Moulton Niguel Water District
       Glen Low                 Earth Genome
       Tom Lupo                 California Department of Fish and Wildlife
       Karen Mogus              California Water Quality Monitoring Council
       Jack Rice*               Farmer and Rancher



*Jack Rice was formerly with the California Farm Bureau Federation

Note: Advisory Council affiliation is listed for reference and should not be
construed as organizational endorsement of the contents of this report.
March 27, 2019


The Governor’s Office of Planning and Research thanks the Advisory Council for
sharing their expertise, perspectives, and vision for the Water Data Consortium.
The final version of the recommendations will be posted on the DWR AB 1755 web
page.

These recommendations will inform the process of actually forming the
Consortium. The formation will require a group of individuals and/or organizations
to collaborate to found the new organization. The Water Foundation convened a
Funders’ Table in parallel with the Advisory Council. The Water Foundation will
continue discussions with that group to develop commitments to fund the
Consortium and will determine the best process to begin development of a
founding board of directors and initial organizational documents. As agreed in
the third Advisory Council meeting, there will be opportunity for the public to
engage and to provide feedback on the initial formation of the Consortium.
Once the Consortium is operational it will have ample opportunity for people to
plug-in according to their interests and expertise.

The Advisory Council members agreed to continue serving in an advisory
capacity until the Consortium is up and running. They may expect to receive
direct inquiries soliciting advice and feedback on an as needed basis and to be
invited to group phone calls occasionally. Their advice is desired, in particular, to
guide the development of recommendations to streamline data submission to
the state.

The contributions of the Advisory Council members and of everyone who
participated in the process were essential to building the foundation to form the
Consortium. Special thanks to the Water Foundation and Department of Water
Resources for funding consultants to assist in the process of developing these
recommendations and thanks to the consultant team: Nancy Saracino, Meghan
Roberts, and Ariel Ambruster. The provision of meeting space by the Water
Foundation, Moulton Niguel Water District, and East Bay Municipal Utilities District
and the provision of food by Moulton Niguel Water District and Water Foundation
was also much appreciated.



Contact Debbie Franco, Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, for more
information.
Introduction
Reliable and readily available data are fundamental to managing
California’s water resources. The importance of data that can be easily
deployed in water management decisions will only increase as we
contend with the effects of climate change, aging infrastructure, a
growing population, and other stressors. Data can expand and align
understanding, suggest alternative actions, allow comparison between
different options, and contribute to collaborative learning environments in
which monitored projects yield new knowledge that informs future
decisions—an iterative, knowledge-gathering process known as adaptive
management. To achieve these results, data must be available and
comprehensible, not only to decision-makers and public agencies, but
also to the public.

In 2016, during one of the most severe droughts on record, California
passed the Open and Transparent Water Data Act, Assembly Bill 1755
(Dodd), a call to action for a renewed approach to accessing water data
that builds trust, supports planning, improves operations, and produces
exponential benefits. To chart a successful path forward, the Department
of Water Resources mobilized a team of eight partner agencies, called
the Partner Agency Team, and quickly launched an impressive effort to
collaborate with and learn from a broad range of data experts, data
providers, and data consumers.

The early results of this work are a Strategic Plan for Assembly Bill 1755
released in January 2018 and finalized in April 2018 and a progress report
released in April 2018. The Strategic Plan establishes an ambitious strategy
to integrate and accelerate efforts to make water data useable through
a federated open data platform by ensuring that data are machine-
readable, easily accessible, curated, and useful to water management
decisions. In the Strategic Plan, the Partner Agency Team recognizes that
it will take broad collaboration inside and outside of state government to
achieve this vision and implement AB 1755 statutory requirements, and it
has collaborated with external partners to convene workshops and other
opportunities for stakeholder engagement on a variety of related topics.




                                                                  1|Page
The Water Foundation assisted the Partner Agency Team by convening
multiple water data experts and stakeholders and facilitating a series of
collaborative workshops focused on data governance. The Water
Foundation and Redstone Strategies made recommendations stemming
from these discussions in the Governance and Funding for Open and
Transparent Water Data, Implementing Assembly Bill 1755 (Redstone
Report). The Partner Agency Team considered the recommendations and
issued a state governance document, Governing California’s Open Water
Data Infrastructure, in June 2018 (updated March 14, 2019). The State
Governance Document contains recommendations that are closely
aligned with those of the Redstone Report.

The State Governance Document and Redstone Report both
recommended the creation of an organization external to the state and
referred to as the Water Data Consortium. The Governor’s Office of
Planning and Research convened a Water Data Advisory Council for a
focused engagement to seek further advice on how to structure an
external organization to complement and inform the Partner Agency
Team’s implementation of AB 1755 and facilitate a renewed approach to
providing and using water data.

This report describes the Water Data Advisory Council’s deliberations and
recommendations. The recommendations are independent from, but
supportive of the state’s AB 1755 Strategic Plan. The Advisory Council
reached the recommendations summarized here, and described in more
detail below, about a governance structure and areas of focus for a
Water Data Consortium. The Advisory Council also provided guidance on
other essential aspects necessary to succeed, which follow this
introduction.

The Advisory Council members were pleased to have the opportunity to
engage in this focused effort. The Advisory Council submits this document
setting forth its recommendations to the Governor’s Office of Planning
and Research.




                                                               2|Page
    Summary of Recommendations
    This figure, reviewed by the Advisory Council, depicts the proposed
    governance structure for the Consortium and generally describes the
    recommended roles of its board, committees and working groups, as well
    as coordination with the Partner Agency Team:



                                            Consortium           Responsible for organizational
                                         Board of Directors       governance, such as overarching
                                                                  strategy, personnel, finance and
                                                                  procurement

   Oversees substantive work of the         Steering                           Partner Agency
    Consortium                              Committee                                Team
   Sets priorities
   Communicates priorities and
    recommendations to the Partner                                            Collects and publishes
    Agency Team                                                                open data
   Provides direction to                                                     Maintains and expands
    management and staff                                                       data portals
                                                                              Adopts and implements
                                                                               standards and protocols

                                            Management
                                             and Staff




                                                                               Data Users
               Technical                                                      Working Group
             Working Group


        Collaborates with the Data Users                             Articulates data users’ needs and
         Working Group                                                 priorities
        Identifies, develops, and recommends                         Facilitates communication with the
         the functional and technical                                  technical working group and
         requirements (standards and                                   stakeholders to address those needs
         protocols)                                                    and priorities
        Supports awareness and adoption of                           Provides recommendations to the
         standards by data providers                                   Water Data Steering Committee
                                                                       regarding sustainable funding
                                                                       mechanism to support the
                                                                       Consortium’s work




                                                                                       3|Page
The Advisory Council makes the following recommendations discussed in
more detail in the Recommendations section below:

Recommendation 1 – Organization Type
      1.1 The Consortium should be a new nonprofit organization.

Recommendation 2 – Governance Structure
      2.1 A small Board of Directors should be responsible for
          organizational governance such as overarching strategy,
          personnel, finance, and procurement, with a Water Data
          Steering Committee overseeing the substantive work of the
          Consortium.

      2.2 Working groups should be set up to augment core
          organizational functions and provide additional venues for open
          participation.

      2.3 The Consortium’s governance structure should be designed to
          facilitate public participation and promote transparency.

      2.4 An Executive Director and staff should be hired to lead and
          manage the work of the Consortium.

Recommendation 3 – Early Activities
      3.1 The Consortium’s early programmatic activities should reflect the
          organization’s key objectives to demonstrate its value.

      3.2 The Consortium should focus on data curation activities and
      resource prioritization.



Advisory Council Guidance
In addition to the structural recommendations summarized above, the
Advisory Council elected to offer overarching guidance for consideration
as the Consortium is being created.

Mission Statement
The Advisory Council advises that a clear mission statement be developed
for the Water Data Consortium and considered the following draft mission



                                                                4|Page
statement to accurately represent how the Advisory Council sees the
high-level purpose of the Water Data Consortium.

       The Water Data Consortium is a nonprofit organization
       formed to support more informed decision-making in
       California about water in the face of climate change and
       other pressures on water resources. The Water Data
       Consortium amplifies efforts to improve water data
       infrastructure by creating a neutral organizational space to
       build trust and facilitate collaboration across sectors. This
       neutral forum also fosters entrepreneurship, innovation, and
       scientific discovery.

While there is general agreement among Advisory Council members on
this draft mission statement, there is also an understanding that it will need
to evolve as the founders embark on forming the organization to more
precisely reflect the function of the Consortium.

The Advisory Council also agreed that the Water Data Consortium’s early
programmatic activities should be defined from the onset to inform
governance structure decisions. These activities are incorporated into
Recommendation 3.

Guiding Principles
At its second meeting, the Water Data Advisory Council validated its
recommendations using the following guiding principles and advises that
these principles inform creation of the Consortium.

The Consortium does:
      Provide an open and transparent foundation to understand
       California’s water system
      Foster trust through public engagement
      Build alignment around use of data to inform decision-making
      Complement but does not duplicate related efforts
      Provide sustainable value.

The Consortium is not:
      A regulatory body
      A taxing authority
      A repository for data


                                                                   5|Page
      Responsible for setting water policy
      Responsible for coordination across state entities.

Conditions Critical to Success
The Advisory Council identified actions it considers critical to the Water
Data Consortium’s success and to designing a governance structure to
accomplish its mission.

          Define clear goals and objectives for the Consortium and spell
           out its role and authority.

          Design the structure in a manner that avoids duplication of other
           efforts and ensures alignment with ongoing work by state
           agencies to implement AB 1755.

          Create early performance metrics, including those regarding
           impact, to drive the focus of the organization.

The Advisory Council also discussed and advises that the following
circumstances will be evidence of success.

          Diverse stakeholders recognize and use the Consortium as a
           neutral space for active and sustained collaboration around the
           role of data in water and water-related decisions.

          Water agencies move forward with more streamlined reporting
           processes for water users and regulated entities.

          Best-in-class open data practices and tools are integrated into
           the state’s open water data systems and processes.

          The public has easily accessible and transparent ways to
           understand and influence the Consortium’s work.

          Open water data is used in critical water resource management
           decisions made by federal, state, and local government entities.

          The Consortium creates and implements a plan for sustainable
           funding.

          Partnerships form around water data, including open water
           data, and deliver better services or outcomes for Californians.


                                                                  6|Page
Alignment
The Advisory Council suggests that the Water Data Consortium should be
structured to align with and complement the work of the state agencies
responsible for implementing AB 1755, providing a collaborative venue
that can be used to amplify the work of the state agencies.

The Partner Agencies agree that the highest benefits of open data
infrastructure can only be achieved if there is broad support and
investment in the infrastructure. The State Governance Document asserts
that “[a] shared governance space will provide the organizational
infrastructure to support broad engagement, investment, adoption, and
persistence of open data infrastructure” (p. 2). The State Governance
Document agreed with the Redstone Report that an external consortium,
working in concert with an internal state agency governing body, could
provide the necessary organizational infrastructure to implement AB 1755.

The Advisory Council advises use of The State Governance Document
table, which follows, to guide development of the working relationship
between the Water Data Consortium and the Partner Agency Team.




                                                               7|Page
          Consortium-Partner Agency Team Relationship
                              Consortium                                        Partner Agency Team
        Gather feedback from stakeholders and                 Collect, federate, and make available water and
        make recommendations to improve data                  ecosystem data.
        collection and publication.
        Gather feedback from stakeholders and make            Maintain and expand federation of existing and future
        recommendations to improve federation of              data portals.
        existing and new data portals.
        Create a venue for developing agreements on           Adopt and implement standards and protocols.
        standards and protocols encouraging voluntary
        adoption by organizations external to the
        state.
        Solicit input on and develop recommendations to       Consider and act upon recommendations, as
        improve the process of data submission to the         appropriate.
        state.
        Develop a pathway to solicit and leverage external    Submit budget change proposals using existing state
        (to the state) resources.                             budget processes to assure adequate state funding for
Tasks                                                         state responsibilities related to AB 1755.
        Promote innovation and lay the groundwork for         Consider new opportunities developed by the
        pursuit of new opportunities.                         Consortium and implement as appropriate and
                                                              feasible.
        Build trust with data producers, providers, users,    Build trust with data producers, providers, users, and
        and consumers.                                        consumers.
        Create a venue for stakeholders that includes         Evaluate progress on the implementation of the open
        state agencies to identify shared benchmarks and      water data infrastructure towards achieving
        performance measures to ensure that water and         identified shared benchmarks and performance
        ecological data are sufficient, accessible, useful,   measures.
        and used.
        Develop, collect, and recommend use cases to          Prioritize data transformation to serve use cases, as
        increase effective decision making.                   appropriate and feasible.
        Recommend strategic direction for data                Collaborate with the Consortium on updates to the AB
        standards, federation, and operation and              1755 Strategic Plan, as needed to support water
        maintenance of the data platform.                     management decision-making, and implement
                                                              strategic direction.

          Source: State Governance Document: Governing California’s Open Water Data
          Infrastructure – DRAFT, v. 3/14/19




                                                                                           8|Page
Assessment
The Advisory Council encourages the Consortium to create metrics
aligned with objectives so that the organization’s performance and
achievements can be tracked and evaluated over time. Stakeholders
should have a role in establishing the metrics and how they will be
evaluated. The Advisory Council also recommends that after a set period
of time (three years may be a reasonable target), the value of the
Consortium should be evaluated in an open and transparent process,
and a decision made by the Consortium’s governing bodies (described
below) whether the organization, as structured, provides benefit, and if it
should be restructured or phased out. A third-party could assist with this
assessment. This is described further below, under Recommendation 1.1.



Recommendations
The Advisory Council recommends that a free-standing Water Data
Consortium be created with a board, staff, steering committee, and
working groups.

Organization Type

Recommendation 1.1: The Consortium should be a new nonprofit organization.
There is agreement among the Advisory Council that the Consortium
should ultimately be a free-standing, non-profit organization. Advisory
Council members identified the following reasons as supporting the
recommendation that a free-standing organization is the appropriate
structure.

      The Consortium will need to be nimble and flexible to adapt to new
       opportunities and to be on the leading edge of innovation.

      The Consortium’s success relies on its ability to establish itself as a
       neutral space for collaboration.

The Advisory Council reached general agreement that setting up the
Water Data Consortium as an independent organization initially, rather
than using an incubation model, was the preferred approach, since the
goal is to ultimately set up an independent organization.




                                                                      9|Page
During its deliberations, the Advisory Council did consider whether to
initially incubate the Consortium within academia or an existing
organization. Advisory Council members identified the following possible
benefits of incubation.

      Incubation allows for further development of the value proposition
       and a better understanding of what the organization will need to
       do.

      Incubation may make start-up easier by providing access to the
       existing organization’s resources and organizational structure.

The Advisory Council identified the following reasons why the incubation
model may not work for the Water Data Consortium.

      There is less need for an incubator to provide initial organizational
       infrastructure since the current goal is to obtain financing for the first
       two or three years of operation prior to formation.

      Transitioning out of the incubating entity could become
       complicated.

      The Consortium would be associated with the reputation and
       agenda of the incubating entity, which could hamper the
       Consortium’s ability to be a neutral place.

      Overhead charged by the incubating entity could be costly.

The Advisory Council discussed the value of building in a planned review
period, requiring a careful assessment of the value of the Water Data
Consortium and whether its continuation is beneficial. This automatic
review could be conducted by the governing bodies, in consultation with
stakeholders and possibly with the assistance of an independent third
party. The Water Data Consortium could be dissolved or restructured if it
completes its mission, becomes obsolete because of shifts in other
organizations or agencies, or no longer provides sufficient value.




                                                                    10 | P a g e
Board, Committee, and Working Group Structure

Recommendation 2.1: A small Board of Directors should be responsible for
organizational governance, such as overarching strategy, personnel, finance,
and procurement, with a Water Data Steering Committee overseeing the
substantive work of the Consortium.
The Advisory Council recommends a Board of Directors of five to seven
individuals responsible for organizational governance, such as
overarching strategy, personnel, finance, and procurement. The Advisory
Council recommends the Board of Directors serve as a public forum to set
Consortium priorities and actions, resolve disagreements, and act as
ambassadors for the Consortium.

The Advisory Council recommends that potential members of the Board
of Directors demonstrate:

      Expertise in areas essential to organizational health, including
       leadership, communications, finance, and fundraising

      Representation of state government, local agencies, NGOs, and
       academia

      Influence and professional recognition in areas related to water
       and ecological data

      Enthusiasm for expanding the use of water and ecological data to
       inform decision-making.

The Advisory Council recommends a Steering Committee of nine to
eleven individuals who will guide the substantive activities of the
Consortium. This includes coordinating with the Board of Directors to
establish goals and performance metrics. In addition, the Steering
Committee should coordinate and direct the activities of the technical
and data users working groups, including establishing and dissolving
working groups as needed and assuring alignment across all working
group activities. The Steering Committee should ensure that its work is
aligned with those of the state agencies and not duplicating efforts.




                                                                   11 | P a g e
The Steering Committee should also provide a periodic report to the
Board of Directors and, in collaboration with staff, solicit the assistance of
the Board of Directors as needed to manage conflict, exert influence,
and provide feedback on programmatic strategies.

The Advisory Council recommends that potential members of the Steering
Committee demonstrate:

      Representation of state and local agencies, regional planning
       entities, NGOs, and academia

      Technical expertise, including data science and water expertise

      Balance of data providers, data users, decision-makers, and
       funders.

Given the state agencies’ role and authority to implement AB 1755, the
Advisory Council recommends that a majority of the representatives on
the Steering Committee be state agency representatives. Finally, to
ensure the distinction between the Steering Committee, Board and
Working groups is clear, the Advisory Council recommends that clear
descriptions be established for the roles and responsibilities, chain of
command and leadership within the Consortium’s structure.

Recommendation 2.2: Working groups should be set up to augment core
organizational functions and provide additional venues for open participation.
The Advisory Council recommends the Consortium establish two standing
working groups—the Data Users Working Group and the Technical
Working Group. Recognizing the crucial importance of communications
and finance, the Advisory Council recommends that these areas receive
adequate resources and attention, either as part of the two standing
working groups or as sub-groups.

The Steering Committee, Data Users Working Group, and Technical
Working Group should serve as the main venues for engagement,
collaboration, and testing of new ideas, concepts, and strategies. The
working groups should provide regular reports to the Steering Committee
and look to the Steering Committee for guidance on how to align efforts
across working groups. Working groups should also consult with the
Steering Committee in instances when stakeholder interests may conflict
on priorities or decisions.

                                                                    12 | P a g e
The Advisory Council recommends working groups designate
representatives responsible for coordinating efforts and making
recommendations to the Steering Committee. The Advisory Council
recommends that the Steering Committee set a clear charge, scope of
work, and expectations for both working groups, and establish a process
for appointing representatives to the working groups. State agency
participation in both working groups will be important to their success. The
Advisory Council also recommends that the Steering Committee assign
Consortium staff to support the working groups to ensure continuity.

The Data Users Working Group should articulate data user needs and
priorities, facilitate communication with the technical working group and
stakeholders to address those needs and priorities, and provide
recommendations to the Steering Committee. While not an exhaustive list,
the Advisory Council recommends considering the following:

      Representation of federal, tribal, state and local agencies, regional
       planning entities, NGOs (with a focus on conservation and
       environmental justice), and academia

      Agricultural and urban water interests

      Communications and finance experts

      Data providers and data users.

The Technical Working Group should identify, develop, and recommend
the functional and technical data requirements (standards, protocols,
and standard operating procedures) for the federated open water data
platform, and support awareness and adoption of standards by data
providers. Again, without foreclosing other options, the Advisory Council
recommends the following be considered in selecting members to serve
on the Technical Working Group:

      Representation of federal, tribal, state and local agencies, regional
       planning entities, NGOs, and academia

      Technical expertise in data and library science, information
       technology and architecture, programming and graphic design

      Data providers and data users.



                                                                 13 | P a g e
Recommendation 2.3: The Consortium’s governance structure should be
designed to facilitate public participation and provide transparency.
The Advisory Council discussed the importance of a robust public
engagement framework to the Water Data Consortium’s governance.
The Consortium should consider models for transparent operations and
decision-making discussed during the course of the Advisory Council’s
three meetings and incorporate best practices from those models to
facilitate effective public engagement in the Consortium’s activities and
governance.

Recommendation 2.4: An executive director and support staff should be hired to
lead and manage the work of the Consortium.
The Advisory Council also recommends that an Executive Director familiar
with data, California water policy, and strong organizational and
engagement skills lead the Consortium staff. Programmatic staff will also
be needed to jump-start the working groups and provide ongoing
support. Staff should act as liaisons between the Executive Director,
working groups, Steering Committee, and Board of Directors, and they
should serve as liaisons between the Consortium and the Partner Agency
Team.

Early Programmatic Activities

Recommendation 3.1: The Consortium’s early programmatic activities should
reflect the organization’s key objectives to demonstrate its value.
To demonstrate the Consortium’s value, the Advisory Council
recommends initial Consortium activities be focused on both core
functions and an initiative to streamline data reporting to the state.

At its first meeting, the Advisory Council discussed the benefits and value
that a water data consortium could bring, including collaborative
procurement to reduce costs, focused analysis and decision-making
support, and working with data providers to establish protocols and
standards for the federated platform. In its second and third meetings, the
Advisory Council specifically focused on two key areas of initial
Consortium activities, agreeing that the Consortium should provide
recommendations related to the design and operation of the state’s
federated water data platform.




                                                                  14 | P a g e
Specifically, the Advisory Council recommends providing advice on the
following topics:

      Priority water and ecological data sources to be accessible from
       the federated data platform

      Protocols for data standardization and quality control

      Data access points that support display of data in an intuitive and
       useable format.

In addition, the Advisory Council felt that the Consortium should develop
and recommend protocols for streamlining data that are reported to
state agencies to reduce reporting redundancies and increase
transparency and efficiency. Primary tasks might include:

      Build from and expand existing assessments of water data reporting
       requirements

      Identify reporting redundancies

      Advise on the development of a federated data platform that
       allows state and federal agencies to access required data in an
       efficient manner, without requiring the reporter to submit the data
       multiple times

      Provide recommendations for new state agency processes and
       protocols to access required data.




                                                                15 | P a g e
Recommendation 3.2: The Consortium should focus on data curation activities
and resource prioritization.
In forming their recommendation for the Consortium’s role in early
programmatic activities, the Advisory Council discussed the spectrum
from data curation to derived analytics, illustrated in the diagram below.
Advisory Council members agreed that the role of the Consortium should
be to support curation of data at the “harmonized” point of the spectrum,
and they recognized that certain use cases may require the data be
available in different forms. The Advisory Council discussed that the
Consortium may demonstrate value by applying data and demonstrating
how it informs decision-making. The Consortium should do so only after
deliberation and consideration of the political implications of any use
case it decides to demonstrate.




Next Steps
The Advisory Council provides these recommendations to the Governor’s
Office of Planning and Research and expresses its appreciation for the
opportunity to engage in this effort. The Advisory Council recommends
that steps be taken to establish a Water Data Consortium within the first six
months of 2019, with the above general structure and guiding principles
leading its activities.




                                                                 16 | P a g e
                 Appendix A

Water Data Advisory Council Meeting Highlights




                                         17 | P a g e
Water Data Advisory Council Meetings
The Water Data Advisory Council met during three focused, publicly-
noticed meetings in late 2018 and early 2019 to evaluate a proposed
governance framework for a Water Data Consortium.

Meeting Highlights

   Meeting 1 – November 15, 2018

         Validated the concept of the Water Data Consortium as
          envisioned in the Water Foundation and draft State Agency
          reports
         Agreed upon the fundamental purpose of improving
          accessibility and utility of data for better informed decision-
          making
         Discussed funding requirements, as well as value the Consortium
          could provide
         Conducted preliminary review of governance structures and
          organizations that may provide successful models on which to
          pattern governance of the Consortium
   Meeting 2 – January 16, 2019

         Agreed upon the guiding principles for the Consortium and what
          the Consortium is not intended to become
         Reviewed the proposal for streamlining data submission as an
          initial substantive focus for the Consortium
         Evaluated options of where best to house the Consortium
         Assessed attributes of successful governance models
   Meeting 3 – February 15, 2019

         Reviewed and agreed upon Advisory Council recommendations
         Provided input on composition of the Governing Board, Water
          Data Steering Committee, as well as the Data Users and
          Technical working groups
         Discussed the spectrum of data curation to data analytics, and
          the role the Water Data Consortium may play along that
          spectrum



                                                                   18 | P a g e
Appendix B

References




             19 | P a g e
References
Assembly Bill 1755 – The Open and Transparent Water Data Act

Water Foundation Report: Governance and Funding for Open and Transparent Water
Data, Implementing Assembly Bill 1755, published by Redstone

State Agency Report: Governing California’s Open Water Data Infrastructure – DRAFT, v.
6/28/18

Strategic Plan for Assembly Bill 1755, the Open and Transparent Water Data Act, April
2018

Governance Examples
California ISO

       Board of Governors

       Technical Advisory Committee

       Energy Imbalance Market Governing Body

       Reliability Coordinator Oversight Committee

       Public Participation Model

International Organization for Standardization

Internet Engineering Task Force

       IETF Administration LLC

       Internet Society

       Internet Architecture Board

       Internet Engineering Steering Group

       Working Groups

Open Geospatial Consortium

Southern California Coastal Water Research Project

       Southern California Coast Water Research Project Commission

       Technical Advisory Group




                                                                           20 | P a g e
